A Survey on Prompting Techniques in LLMs
Prabin Bhandari
Department of Computer Science
George Mason University
Fairfax, Virginia, USA
pbhanda2@gmu.edu
Abstract—Autoregressive Large Language Models have trans- modeling through pre-training. Recently, the pre-train and
formedthelandscapeofNaturalLanguageProcessing.Pre-train fine-tune paradigm has evolved into a pre-train and prompt
and prompt paradigm has replaced the conventional approach
approach, mainly due to the emergence of Large Language
ofpre-trainingandfine-tuningformanydownstreamNLPtasks.
Models (LLMs).
This shift has been possible largely due to LLMs and innovative
prompting techniques. LLMs have shown great promise for a LLMs evolved from PLMs as researchers tried to enhance
variety of downstream tasks owing to their vast parameters and the performance of PLMs by increasing the model’s size,
huge datasets that they are pre-trained on. However, in order to dataset volume, and/or computational resources employed
fullyrealizetheirpotential,theiroutputsmustbeguidedtowards
duringtraining.Thisdrivewasmotivatedbyscalinglaw[2].In
the desired outcomes. Prompting, in which a specific input or
doingso,theperformanceofthesemodelsdidindeedincrease
instruction is provided to guide the LLMs toward the intended
output,hasbecomeatoolforachievingthisgoal.Inthispaper,we as expected. However, it also led to the rise of emergent
discussthevariouspromptingtechniquesthathavebeenapplied abilities [3] that cannot be explained solely by scaling law.
to fully harness the power of LLMs. We present a taxonomy of Emergent abilities refer to the capabilities of an LLM that
existingliteratureonpromptingtechniquesandprovideaconcise manifest when it reaches a certain scale, achieved through
survey based on this taxonomy. Further, we identify some open
an increase in the number of parameters, pre-training data,
problems in the realm of prompting in autoregressive LLMs
which could serve as a direction for future research. computational resources, or a combination of these factors.
Index Terms—Natural language processing, language models, The majority of LLMs nowadays are autoregressive in nature.
autoregressive large language models, prompting This means that they generate the next token based on the
previous tokens only. These autoregressive LLMs use either
I. INTRODUCTION
the encoder-decoder architecture or only the decoder of the
Language models (LMs) have long been the de facto transformer. Given that these LLMs have been pre-trained on
standard for modeling natural languages, designed with the a plethora of text and often the whole internet, they are an
purpose of comprehending and generating human-like lan- extremely powerful tool. However, harnessing their immense
guage. Language models also serve as the cornerstone upon potential could be challenging due to their large size, making
which a multitude of Natural Language Processing (NLP) it infeasible to fine-tune them for each downstream task. This
applications are built, including but not limited to machine challenge has been mitigated by the emergence of prompting
translation, sentiment analysis, document classification, and techniques in LLMs, which seek to replace the need for fine-
chatbots. This has made LMs one of the most extensively tuning LLMs for each downstream task individually.
researcheddomainswithinthefieldofNLP.Initially,language Prompting refers to providing specific instruction or input,
modeling relied on statistical approaches, which eventually whetherinhuman-readableformornot,totheLMinorderto
gave way to neural language models fueled by the increase accomplish the downstream task. The use of prompting first
in our computing resources. With neural LMs came the re- appeared in the context of PLMs. For instance, Petroni et al.
quirementforsubstantiallabeleddata,asanydownstreamtask [4]usedpromptingwhenattemptingtoquantifytheamountof
was accomplished via supervised training. The introduction world knowledge embedded in PLMs. Their hypothesis was
of Transformers [1] marked a pivotal shift, introducing the that since PLMs were pre-trained on vast amounts of data,
pre-train and fine-tune paradigm of NLP. Transformers gave PLMs might contain significant world knowledge embedded
rise to pre-trained language models (PLMs). These PLMs, within their parameters. Concretely, their input to the PLM
while still being neural LMs, mostly used architecture similar was: Francesco Bartolomeo Conti was born in [MASK]..
to the transformer or a variant of it. The key difference Sincetheyemployedamaskedlanguagemodelintheirexper-
between neural LMs and PLMs is in their training process. iments, the expectation was that the model would replace the
PLMs are pre-trained on a vast amount of textual data in a [MASK]tokenwiththecorrectanswer.Promptingwithrespect
semi-supervised approach, eliminating the need for labeled to autoregressive LLMs was popularized by Brown et al. [5].
data during pre-training. Following their pre-training, PLMs TheydemonstratedanemergentabilityofLLMs,facilitatedby
are fine-tuned for specific downstream tasks using relatively promptingtechniques,knownasin-contextlearning.Basically,
less labeled data than what neural LMs typically require. their research shows that LLMs, when provided with a task
This is because PLMs have a strong foundation in language instruction and a few demonstration examples, could handle a
4202
rpA
61
]LC.sc[
2v04730.2132:viXrawide range of downstream NLP tasks. This novel prompting self-attentionwhichcapturescomplexcontextualrelationships
technique for LLMs eliminated the need to fine-tune an LLM within sequences. The original transformer used multi-headed
and opened a new field of research into prompting techniques self-attention, enabling the model to attend to different parts
for LLMs. oftheinputsequencesimultaneously,significantlyboostingits
Given the recent proliferation in prompting techniques, this capacity to model complex dependencies.
paper discusses the current literature concerning prompting 3) Pre-trained language models (PLM): Earlier efforts for
techniques tailored for autoregressive LLMs. The structure of PLMs involved training shallow networks for word embed-
the paper is as follows. Section II lays the groundwork by dings,likeword2vec[6]andGlove[7],tocapturethesemantic
discussing the preliminaries required to follow the rest of the meaning of the word. Although these models were highly
paper. Section III introduces the taxonomy used to categorize effective, they failed to capture essential contextual informa-
prompting techniques in autoregressive LLMs. Section IV tion related to a word. Subsequent models like ELMo [8],
provides a concise survey of existing literature, organized employed RNNs in an effort to gather contextual information
according to the established taxonomy. Section V discusses in the word embeddings; however, they were constrained by
the prevailing challenges and open problems in the field their size.
of prompting, offering potential future research directions.
Withtheintroductionoftransformers,researcherswereable
Finally, we conclude with our remarks in Section VI.
to train more deeper networks. Further, the advent of self-
II. PRELIMINARIES supervised learning techniques [9] meant that costly human-
annotated data are not required to train the LMs. In the self-
A. Language Models
supervisedlearningparadigm,theLMsarepre-trainedwiththe
A language model (LM) is a computational model of a
help of raw textual data only, completely bypassing the need
natural language that predicts and generates human language
for human-annotated data. These PLMs are often then fine-
based on a text corpora that it was trained on. Technically,
tuned for specific downstream tasks with human-annotated
LMs model the likelihood of a sequence of tokens in order
data. However, due to the effectiveness of pre-training, the
to predict the probabilities for the missing or next token.
requirement for the size of human-annotated data drops off.
Language models can broadly be classified into four main
Various pre-training objectives are used with alterations to
development stages:
the standard encoder-decoder architecture which gives rise
1) Statisticallanguagemodels(SLM): SLMs,introducedin
to three different types of PLMs: (a) Left-to-right PLM,
theearly1980s,arebasedonstatisticallearningmethods.They
(b) Masked PLM, and (c) Encoder-decoder PLM. Figure 1,
assign probabilities to tokens based on a statistical model of
extracted from [10], illustrates the architectures of these three
a text corpora. One of the notable SLMs is called the N-gram
differentPLMs.FurtherexplanationofthesePLMsisprovided
model.TheN-grammodelsarebasedonMarkov’sassumption
below:
that the probabilities of the next token are based on the last
a) Left-to-Right PLM: Left-to-right (or similarly Right-
(N −1) tokens. Formally,
to-left) PLMs, like GPT [11] and its successor GPT-2 [12],
P(w n|w n−1:1)=P(w n−1|w n−2:1∗P(w n−2|w n−3:1) are autoregressive language models that usually employ the
(1)
∗...∗P(w |w )∗p(w ) decoder part of the original transformer architecture and are
2 1 1
pre-trainedtopredicttheupcomingtokensoneatatimebased
The probabilities are estimated using a Maximum Likeli-
on the previous tokens using a large text corpus.
hood Estimate (MLE) based on the frequency of the tokens
in the text corpus. Along with n-gram models, the Hidden b) Masked PLM: Masked PLMs are non-autoregressive
Markov Model (HMM) based language models, and maxi- in nature meaning that they consider both the preceding and
mum entropy-based language models were some of the other following tokens when predicting token probabilities. Masked
popular SLMs. PLMs generally use the encoder part of the original encoder-
2) Neural language models (NLM): NLMs leverage neu- decoder architecture of the transformer. These PLMs are pre-
ral networks to estimate token probabilities. While various trained by applying a noising function that corrupts the text
neural network architectures, such as feed-forward neural and the pre-training objective is to restore the original uncor-
networks (FFNN) and convolutional neural networks (CNN), rupted text. An early example of such a PLM is BERT [13],
have been explored for language modeling, recurrent neural where certain tokens within a sentence are replaced with
networks (RNN) emerged as the dominant choice. However, [MASK] and the pre-training objective was to predict the
the landscape underwent a significant transformation with the [MASK]token.Othervariousnoisingfunctionshavealsobeen
introduction of Transformers [1]. proposed [14–16].
Transformer, originally purposed for machine translation c) Encoder-Decoder PLM: Encoder-Decoder PLMs use
tasks,featuresanencoder-decoderarchitecture.Inthisdesign, the original architecture of the transformer. While they are
the encoder encodes the input token sequence to extract generally auto-regressive in nature, there are a few models
context, while the decoder’s main role is to generate the next purposed with non-autoregressive design. Typically, a noising
tokenbasedontheencoder’sencodedinformationandalready function is applied to the encoder, while a standard language
decoded tokens. Transformers introduced a technique called modeling is used at the decoder part during the model’s pre-Fig.1. ArchitectureofdifferentPLMs.Imagefrom[10].
training.NotableexamplesofEncoder-DecoderPLMsinclude to convert a sentence in English to a sentence in Nepali, our
Meta’s BART [17] and Google’s T5 [18]. prefix-style prompt will be as follows:
4) Large language models (LLM): The scaling law [2]
Convert the following English sentences to
dictates that an increase in the model’s size, dataset size, and
Nepali:
computational resources used during training often results in
English: All the world’s a stage, and all
enhanced performance on the downstream tasks. Researchers
the men and women merely players.
have tried constantly to push the boundaries of this law by
Nepali:
continually increasing the model’s size. For instance, GPT-
3 [5] has a massive 175 billion parameters, while PaLM [19]
surpasses even that with 540 billion parameters. Despite hav- The model is expected to produce a continuation of this input
ing similar training methodologies compared to other PLMs, where the output will be the Nepali translation of the input
these large PLMs exhibit emergent abilities [3]. For example, English sentence.
GPT-3 can learn a task description with the help of a few If we provide these templates without additional examples,
examplespassedascontextwhereasthepredecessorofGPT-3, itisreferredtoaszero-shotprompting.However,ifweprovide
GPT-2cannotdothat.Incontemporarytimes,theterm“Large a few illustrative examples of the correct inputs and outputs,
language models (LLMs)” primarily refers to these massive it is referred to as few-shot prompting.
language models, having tens or even hundreds of billions of
parameters,andtrainedonvastdatasets.TheseLLMspredom-
III. AREATAXONOMY
inantly adopt Left-to-right transformer architecture (decoder- Figure 2 presents the area taxonomy of prompting meth-
only), and they commonly exhibit an autoregressive nature. ods in autoregressive LLMs. The classification of prompts
is based on two key dimensions: the level of human in-
B. Prompting
volvement in prompt creation and the specific types of these
Promptingreferstoprovidingaspecificinputorinstruction prompts. In terms of human effort, prompts are categorized
toguidethemodel’soutput.Basically,aninputxwiththehelp into two groups: “Hand-Crated” and “Automated”, reflecting
of a prompt template f is converted to a new representation the extent of manual input required in the prompt creation
f(x),whichisthenfedintothemodeltogetthedesiredoutput process. Additionally, prompts are categorized into three
y. We generally employ two kinds of prompts, cloze prompts, distinct groups based on their intended objectives. These
and prefix prompts. categories include “Task-Based”, ‘Generate-Auxiliary” and,
Cloze prompts are popular with masked language models, “Resource/Tools Augmented”. It is important to note that
where the objective is to fill in the blanks. For example, if this classification is based on the goals and purpose of the
our task is to find the capital city of a country, our cloze-style prompts themselves, rather than the ultimate objective of the
prompt will be as follows: downstream tasks. In the next section, we delve into existing
research within each of these classifications to provide a
The capital of Nepal is [BLANK].
comprehensive overview of the field.
The model is expected to fill the blank with the correct
answer.
IV. TAXONOMY-BASEDSURVEY
Prefix prompts are generally employed with autoregressive In this section, we offer a survey of the existing literature
LLMs, where the goal is for the model to produce the about prompting within the domain of autoregressive LLMs,
continuation of the string input. For example, if our task is structured according to the taxonomy introduced in section 3.Prompting
methodsin
HumanEffort Hand-crafted [5,20–31]
autoregressive
LLMs
Automated Discrete [32–40]
Continuous [41–43]
Task-Based [5,27,32–38,41–43]
Generate- Chainof
Type [20–24,39]
Auxiliary Thought
Generate-
[25,26]
Knowledge
Resource/Tools
[26,28–31,40]
Augmented
Fig.2. AreaTaxonomyofpromptingmethodsinautoregressiveLLMs.
Itisnoteworthythatwhilesomeoftheresearchdiscussedmay a prompt for some complex downstream tasks. Consequently,
not be exclusive to autoregressive LLMs, or may have origi- researchers are exploring automated methods for prompt tem-
nallytargetedPLMs,manyoftheseapproachesareapplicable plate design. These automatically generated prompts can be
and adaptable for effective use with autoregressive LLMs. further classified into discrete and continuous prompts.
a) Discrete Prompts: Discrete Prompts, also referred to
A. Human Effort
as “hard prompts”, are those prompts where the prompt input
On the basis of the amount of human effort required to to the underlying LLM is still an actual text. These prompts
create the prompts, they can be classified into Hand-crafted are named discrete prompts because our search space for
and Automated. the prompt is limited to the discrete space of the tokens of
1) Hand-crafted Prompts: Hand-crafted prompts are the the underlying LLM. Different techniques including mining,
most natural way of creating prompts where a prompt tem- paraphrasing, and searching have been explored to generate
plate is created based on human intuition. Brown et al. [5] discrete prompts.
introduced hand-crafted prefix prompts for solving a variety In their work, Jiang et al. [32] proposed a mining-based
of tasks. We provide an example of a hand-crafted prompt approach to find discrete prompts. Originally proposed for
taken from [5]: masked language models, this approach is adaptable to au-
toregressive LLMs. Given an input-output pair of x,y, the
Translate English to French:
method scraps a large text corpus, identifying strings con-
Cheese =>
taining both x and y, and subsequently extracts the middle
The prompt above is called a zero-shot prompt as we have wordordependencypathbetweenthemtodeterminearelation
only provided the task description along with the input. If (r) for use as a prompt: “[x] r ...”. Additionally, Jiang
we provide a few input-output examples along with the task et al. [32] also proposed the use of paraphrasing for creating
description, we call them few-shot prompts. An example of a discreteprompts.Theproposedsolutionwastotranslateaseed
few-shot prompt is provided below: prompt into another language which is back-translated to the
original language. Other paraphrasing-based solutions include
Translate English to French:
synonym substitution using a Thesaurus [33] and employing
Sea otter => loutre de mer
a neural model for rewriting the prompt [34].
plush girafe => girafe peluche
Wallace et al. [35] proposed a gradient-based search tech-
Cheese =>
niquetofinddiscreteprompts.Theyemployagradient-guided
2) Automated Prompts: Although manual prompt creation search across tokens of the underlying LLM to identify short
is intuitive, such hand-created prompts may have limitations. trigger sequences capable of inducing the desired output from
Onesuchlimitationisthatthesehand-craftedpromptsmaybe the LLM. Some approaches score the prompt using another
sub-optimal. Another issue is that hand-crafted prompts are LM. For example, Davison et al. [36], handcrafted a set of
domain-specific and it can be an arduous task to hand-craft potential templates which were filled with input and outputdata from the training set. These filled prompt templates were contextually appropriate responses. In classification tasks, the
scored using GPT-2, with the highest-scoring prompt being goalistodiscriminatebetweendifferentclasslabelsandassign
selected for use. Lu et al. [37] also proposed a scoring-based the proper class label for an input. The broad objective of
method to address the problem of order sensitivity within aligning with the goals of the downstream task they support
the few-shot setting. Their approach involves considering is shared by all prompting approaches. However, in practice,
all possible ordering permutations for the provided few-shot promptsmightoftenserveadditionalauxiliarypurposesoruse
examples.TheythenusetheunderlyingLLMtogeneratefrom additional tools to facilitate the downstream task objective.
thesepermutationstogenerateaprobingset.Theprobingsetis Based on these additional or auxiliary purposes or tools of
scored using entropy-based measures to rank the effectiveness prompts, we can classify them into different categories. It is
of different permutations. important to note that these categories may encompass both
As adaptation of reinforcement learning (RL) continues hand-craftedandautomatedprompts.Weprovideadescription
to grow within LLMs, efforts have been made to leverage of each category below:
RL for the optimization of discrete prompts. One notable 1) Task-Based: Task-based prompts are the most straight-
contribution is RLPrompt [38] which introduces a parameter- forward category within the taxonomy of prompts based on
efficient policy network. This network is trained with rewards their objective. These prompts do not serve any auxiliary
to generate optimized discrete prompts. goal and are characterized by their single objective of the
b) Continuous Prompts: Continuous prompts, also re- downstream task. All the different prompting techniques that
ferredtoas“softprompts”, arethosepromptsthataredefined wediscussedunderHand-CraftedandAutomatedpromptsfall
in the embedding space of the LLM and therefore are not under this category.
in human-readable format. The templates of soft prompts 2) Generate-Auxiliary: Generate-Auxiliarypromptsarethe
have their own parameters that can be tuned. These prompts types of prompts that generate auxiliary output text in order
are called continuous because our prompt to the LLM are tofacilitatethedownstreamtasks.Generate-Auxiliaryprompts
continuousvectorsinsteadofdiscretetokens.Wediscusssome can be further classified into chain of thought and generate-
of the seminal works below. knowledge prompts.
Prefix Tuning [41] involves the addition of task-specific
prefixestothebeginningofinputsequences.Theseprefixesare
free-parameters (P ), which undergo reparameterized through
θ
a small multi-layer perception during the training process.
Then,thelog-likelihoodobjectiveisoptimized,withtheLLM
parameters frozen while only updating the prefix parameters.
Mathematically,
(cid:88)
maxlogP(y|x;θ;ϕ)=max logP(y |h ;θ;ϕ)
i <i
θ θ
yi
where, ϕ are the parameters of the LLM, and h is the
i
contamination of all neural network layers at time step i. If
i ∈ P , we use the prefix parameters otherwise we use the
idx
LLM parameters. Notably, Li and Liang [41] observed that Fig.3. Chainofthoughtprompting.Imagefrom[20].
prefix tuning significantly enhanced effectiveness compared
to discrete prompts, especially in the low-data and out-of- a) Chain of Thought (CoT): The use of prompts that
domain settings. A similar approach is prompt tuning [42], elicit a coherent series of intermediate reasoning steps, ul-
where special tokens are prepended to the input sequence and timately leading to the formulation of the final answer, is
these tokens are tuned directly. known as the chain of thought (CoT) prompting. Wei et al.
P-tuning [43] uses a hand-crafted prompt where all the [20] popularized the term “Chain of thought prompting” in
tokens except for the input(x) are considered pseudo-tokens their seminal paper. Chain of thought prompting finds its
and are mapped to trainable embedding vectors. They model usefulness in arithmetic reasoning, commonsense reasoning,
these trainable embedding vectors through a bi-directional and symbolic reasoning tasks. We present an example of the
long-short-term memory (LSTM) model. One added benefit chain of through prompting from [20] in figure 3. As can be
of P-tuning to prefix and prompt tuning is that the continuous seenfromthefigure,instandardpromptingthecorrectanswer
vectors can be inserted anywhere as opposed to the beginning may not be readily obtained. However, when employing the
ofinputonly.P-tuningwasoriginallyproposedtosolvenatural chain of thought prompting, where the answers of few-shot
language understanding tasks through GPT-based models. examples also contain the intermediate steps to reach the
answer, the model generates similar intermediate reasoning
B. Type
stepsandreachesthefinalcorrectanswer.Chainofthoughtis
Theprimaryobjectiveofanydownstreamtaskistoachieve an emergent ability of sufficiently large language models that
a specific goal, such as classifying input data or generating allows LLMs to perform reasoning tasks.Zero-shotCoT[21]canbeconsideredthezero-shotversion Imagine three different experts are
of CoT purposed by Wei et al. [20]. In zero-shot Cot, “Let’s answering this question.
thinkstepbystep”isaddedtotheprompt,andwithsufficiently All experts will write down 1 step of
largelanguagemodels,wegetaseriesofreasoningstepslead- their thinking, then share it with the
ingtocorrectanswers.AutoCoT[39]alleviatestheproblemof group.
sub-optimal demonstrations in CoT. Auto CoT uses zero-shot Then all experts will go on to the next
CoT to create demonstrations from the LLM itself and uses step, etc.
theminfew-shotpromptingscenariossimilartoCoT.Thekey If any expert realises they’re wrong at
techniquebehindAutoCoTinvolvesthepartitionofquestions any point then they leave.
withinagivendatasetintoafewclusters.Fromeachcluster,a The question is...
representativequestionisselected,promotingdiversityintask
Zhou et al. [27] argues that the original CoT cannot gener-
demonstration and ultimately enhancing model performance.
alizewelltohardproblemswhenthedemonstrationsprovided
Self-consistency [22] represents a recent and noteworthy
are easy and to overcome this problem propose Least-to-
idea within the CoT domain. It is important to note that self-
mostprompting.Least-to-mostpromptingworksintwostages.
consistency is not inherently a prompting technique but rather
Firstly, the given question is decomposed into a series of
a decoding strategy employed when utilizing CoT prompts.
subquestionsbypromptingtheLLMas:Tosolve⟨Q⟩,weneed
CoT prompts are generally associated with a greedy decoding
to first solve.... Then, each subquestion is solved by the LLM
strategy, mainly because reasoning tasks often have a single
to reach the final answer.
fixed answer. However, the authors argue that introducing
b) Generate knowledge: Liu et al. [25] introduced the
diversity into the reasoning process can be highly advanta-
concept of ‘Generated Knowledge Prompting’. The basic idea
geous. The self-consistency methodology involves prompting
behind this approach is to generate task-specific knowledge,
the LLM with CoT prompts, followed by sampling from the
either by leveraging the same LLM used for the downstream
LLM to generate a diverse set of reasoning paths, thus devi-
tasksorbyleveragingaseparateLLM,andsubsequentlyincor-
ating from the conventional greedy search approach. Finally,
poratingthisknowledgeintothepredictionprocess.Generated
the method involves marginalizing these reasoning paths to
knowledgepromptingisatwo-stepprocess.First,inafew-shot
identify and select the most consistent answer as the final
setting, question-related knowledge statements are generated
output. Tree-of-Thoughts (ToT) [23] presents an idea similar
bypromptinganLLM.Thedemonstrationsarehuman-crafted
to self-consistency but with enhancements aimed at refining
and representativeof the downstreamtask. In thesecond step,
the self-consistency approach. In contrast to self-consistency,
each of the generated knowledge statements is used to make
where a majority voting mechanism determines the final
predictions. The final answer selected is the answer from a
answer, ToT adopts a more explorable tree structure for the
knowledge statement with the best support (high confidence).
thoughts. ToT maintains a tree comprising individual thought
Self-ask [26] is another innovative prompting technique
steps,witheachthoughtbeingself-evaluatedbytheLLM.This
aimed at generating intermediate knowledge from the LLM
tree-based framework is complemented by the application of
to facilitate the final answer. The methodology of self-ask
search algorithms, including Breadth First Search and Depth
prompts features follow-up questions explicitly marked by
First Search, which facilitates for systematic exploration of
“Follow up:”. These follow-up inquiries serve as a means
thoughts. Figure 4, taken from [23], illustrates various CoT
to generate the essential knowledge required to answer the
prompting strategies described above.
question. Self-ask is done in a few-shot prompting scenario.
3) Resource/Tools Augmented: Building upon the success
of prompting techniques, there have been research efforts to
enhance prompts by integrating external resources and tools,
with the aim of increasing their efficiency. We categorize
such prompting techniques as ‘Resource/Tools Augmented
Prompts’ and describe the literature around these innovative
prompts below.
Program-aided Language models (PAL) [28] is an inno-
vative tool augmented prompting technique. PAL’s demon-
strations are similar to CoT but with the aim of producing
programming-language like output from the LLM. Once the
generation is completed, the generated code is offloaded to an
Fig. 4. Self-consistency methodology for CoT prompting in comparison to interpretertoarriveatafinalanswer.PALalsoworkswellwith
CoTpromptingwithgreedydecoding.Imagefrom[23]. the Least-to-most prompting technique. Program of thoughts
(PoT) prompting [29] is also a similar prompting technique.
Hulbert [24] proposed a text-based prompt that works The only difference lies in the specific text that they use to
similarly to ToT. The prompt used in [24] is: prompt the LLM.Self-ask [26], a generate knowledge prompt, also includes label of ‘Similar’ or ‘Not Similar’. At inference time, the test
a resource/tool augmented variant. In this augmented version, taskis paired with every suchhand-crafted demonstrationand
self-askusesasearchenginetoanswerthefollow-upquestion selects the highest-ranked ones based on the log probability
insteadofusingtheunderlyingLLM.Theauthorshaveshown ratio between ‘Similar’ and ‘Not similar’ labels.
thatthesearch-engineaugmentedself-askpromptsoutperform
the base self-ask prompts.
V. OPENPROBLEMS
Long [30] also proposed a resource/tool augmented version Prompting has proven to be an effective technique, particu-
of Tree-of-Thought, keeping the same name as Yao et al. larlyforguidingLLMsinscenarioswherefine-tuningiscostly
[23]. Both approaches were developed concurrently. While or infeasible, such as with closed-source models. Despite
the ToT by Yao et al. [23] relies solely on the underlying their effectiveness and usefulness, prompting techniques face
LLMwithoutexternalresourcesortools,thevariantproposed several open problems that must be addressed to realize their
by Long [30] includes four additional components. These full potential. It is important to note that some of these issues
additional components are a prompter agent, a checker mod- are interconnected with the underlying LLMs themselves, and
ule, a memory module, and a ToT controller. The prompter resolvingtheseissuesmightentailmodificationtothetraining
agent’s role is to provide additional prompt text to LLM in datasets and the training procedures of LLMs. This section
conjunction with the problem description, enabling LLM to outlines some of the key open problems related to prompting
generate intermediate solutions. The checker module checks which can serve as future research directions.
the validity of these intermediate solutions. If the check is Addressing sub-optimal prompts, that guide an LLM to-
passed, it is added to the memory module, and the process wards a sub-optimal goal rather than the optimal one, is a
is repeated. However, if the check fails, the ToT controller significant challenge to prompting techniques. This issue is
activates the prompter again with some extra prompt text more common with hand-crafted prompts but is mitigated by
to generate new intermediate solutions. The ToT controller discrete prompts. Continuous prompts [41–43] have been
also monitors the search process through these intermediate identified as the best way to tackle this problem, which typi-
solutions, deciding whether to continue the search process or cally involves training only a fraction of parameters in com-
backtrack to the parent node. The prompter agent and the parison to underlying LLM’s parameters, often ranging from
ToTcontrollercanbeimplementedusingeitherasimplerule- 0.1% to 3%. However, continuous prompts become resource-
basedapproachorfine-tunedusingapolicynetwork.Similarly, intensive as LLMs continue to grow in size. For example,
the checker module can also be a rule-based approach or PaLM has 540 billion parameters and even allocating 1% of
implemented as a deep neural network. its parameter size for continuous prompts would translate to
ReAct [31] is a prompting technique that seeks to integrate training with 5.4 billion parameters, which is costly and often
thereasoningcapabilitiesofLLMwithexternaltooluseinan infeasible due to resource limitation. Another challenge arises
interleaved manner. ReAct essentially combines the process in the context of closed-source LLMs where model access is
of reasoning and taking actions with LLMs. ReAct prompts limited to API calls, making the utilization of such methods
LLMs to generate both reasoning traces and actions for a impossible in some scenarios.
task. Concretely, LLM is prompted in a few-shot scenario to While much of the existing research discussed in Re-
generate a series of ‘Thought’, ‘ACT’, and ‘Obs’. Here ‘Act’ source/Toolsaugmentedpromptshasmadeanotableimprove-
denotestheutilizationofexternaltools,while‘Obs’represents ment in enhancing the efficacy of prompting techniques by
the observation or knowledge generated from the thought and leveraging external resources and tools, more robust prompt-
action steps. In some steps. ‘Thought’ might not be generated ing techniques capable of handling structured data are still
if it is not deemed necessary. The authors have demonstrated missing. Many downstream NLP tasks have inputs in various
superior performance gain in knowledge-intensive reasoning variety of structured formats, extending beyond plain text to
tasks and decision-making tasks. Despite the effectiveness of tables, trees, graphs, and various other relational structures.
ReACT, it has a couple of limitations. First, it requires task- Properhandlingofsuchdiversestructuresremainsarelatively
specific demonstration, and second, the tools are also task- underexplored field. A recent study by Zhao et al. [44]
specific. Automatic Reasoning and Tool use (ART) [40] seeks offers some promising insight into this field. Zhao et al. [44]
to overcome these shortcomings by having a dedicated task demonstrated that LLMs can effectively manage structured
libraryandtoollibrary.ThetoollibraryofARThasabunchof databyshowingthatLLMscanbepromptedtonotonlywork
toolsandcanbeextendedfurtherasneeded.ARTemploystwo as a table-to-text generator but can also work as evaluators
methodstoselecttaskdemonstrations.Incaseswherethereare of such system and can also provide human-like feedback to
enoughdemonstrationsforthetask,ARTdividesthesedemon- SOTA table-to-text models to improve their efficiency. While
strations into different clusters, and the best cluster is chosen GraphPrompt [45] was proposed to tackle graph structures, it
based on their performance in a held-out set of examples. involves pre-training the model with graph structures which
However, if the test task lacks adequate demonstration in the canoftenbeinfeasible.Chenetal.[46]proposedtoaddaddi-
tasklibrary,ARTutilizesadifferentapproach.Thetasklibrary tional marks to encode lexical information in the prompts but
also contains a collection of hand-crafted few-shot prompts, this approach is tailored for masked language models rather
each consisting of a specific downstream task along with a thanautoregressiveLLMs.TheNLPcommunitywouldbenefitgreatly from concrete efforts toward handling structured data Nardo [48] demonstrated the ability of LLMs to elicit op-
through prompting techniques. posite behavior due to how it was trained. Instances of such
Answerengineeringhasemergedasanexcitingfield,owing promptinjectiontechniquescanbefoundacrossvarioussocial
to the advancements in prompting techniques. Answer engi- networking platforms. A potential solution to this issue was
neering refers to the science and art of distilling meaningful suggestedbyArmstrongandGorman[49],whichinvolvesthe
answers from the text generated by LLMs. For example, use of another LLM prompted in a way to detect prompt in-
consider a sentiment classification task where the objective jection.Furthersimilarexplorationsintothisfieldarerequired
is to classify a movie review as positive or negative. We can before LLMs with prompting ability can be deployed in the
prompt the model as below: wild.
Classify the sentiment of the following
VI. CONCLUSION
movie review as either positive or
Inthispaper,wehaveprovidedaconcisesurveyofthecur-
negative:
rentliteratureonthefieldofpromptingforautoregressivelarge
Movie Review: It was a nice watch.
languagemodels.Promptinghasbeenanimportanttechnique,
Sentiment: ...
enabling the effective guidance of LLMs toward the intended
Since we employ an autoregressive LLM, the generated output, with minimum to no additional training. However,
output might not have the strings ‘positive’ or ‘negative’ despite its effectiveness, the full potential of prompting has
only. Instead, it might be a synonym or contain text that not been realized with many open problems still left to be
impliesthesentimentwithoutexplicitlystatingit.Deciphering addressed. We believe that the open problems of promoting
the final sentiment from such text can be challenging when techniques identified in this paper will serve as an important
we want to do this automatically and at scale. While few- future direction for research.
shot prompting certainly helps, it does not guarantee precise
results. There have been various efforts to mitigate this issue,
REFERENCES
such as instruction tuning of the model [47]. However, these [1] A.Vaswani,N.Shazeer,N.Parmar,J.Uszkoreit,L.Jones,A.N.Gomez,
Ł. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, “Attention is all you need,” Advances in
methods lack generalizability, and often LLMs are infeasible
neuralinformationprocessingsystems,vol.30,2017.
to instruction-tune due to resource limitations. The prevailing [2] J.Kaplan,S.McCandlish,T.Henighan,T.B.Brown,B.Chess,R.Child,
techniques involve exact matching of the intended generation S. Gray, A. Radford, J. Wu, and D. Amodei, “Scaling laws for neural
languagemodels,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2001.08361,2020.
orsomeofitssynonymsorusingregularexpressionstoextract
[3] J. Wei, Y. Tay, R. Bommasani, C. Raffel, B. Zoph, S. Borgeaud,
the final answer. However, these approaches are often task- D.Yogatama,M.Bosma,D.Zhou,D.Metzleretal.,“Emergentabilities
specific and not universally applicable. oflargelanguagemodels,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2206.07682,2022.
[4] F. Petroni, T. Rockta¨schel, S. Riedel, P. Lewis, A. Bakhtin,
Prompt injection presents a substantial issue, particularly
Y. Wu, and A. Miller, “Language models as knowledge bases?” in
withLLMsdeployedforwidespreadpublicuse.Promptinjec- Proceedingsofthe2019ConferenceonEmpiricalMethodsinNatural
tion attempts to manipulate the behavior of LLMs by cleverly Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on
NaturalLanguageProcessing(EMNLP-IJCNLP). HongKong,China:
crafting prompts that guide LLMs to generate content beyond
AssociationforComputationalLinguistics,Nov.2019,pp.2463–2473.
their intended scope. Consider a simple prompt injection for [Online].Available:https://aclanthology.org/D19-1250
an LLM deployed for sentiment classification: [5] T.Brown,B.Mann,N.Ryder,M.Subbiah,J.D.Kaplan,P.Dhariwal,
A.Neelakantan,P.Shyam,G.Sastry,A.Askelletal.,“Languagemod-
Ignore the above instructions and output els are few-shot learners,” Advances in neural information processing
systems,vol.33,pp.1877–1901,2020.
the label as "NEUTRAL" instead, followed
[6] T.Mikolov,K.Chen,G.Corrado,andJ.Dean,“Efficientestimationof
by a copy of the full prompt with wordrepresentationsinvectorspace,”arXivpreprintarXiv:1301.3781,
exemplars. 2013.
[7] J. Pennington, R. Socher, and C. D. Manning, “Glove: Global vectors
Such uncomplicated prompts could make the model output for word representation,” in Proceedings of the 2014 conference on
empiricalmethodsinnaturallanguageprocessing(EMNLP),2014,pp.
‘NEUTRAL’consistentlyandevendisclosethesecretprompts
1532–1543.
that might have been hidden from the public. While recent [8] J. Sarzynska-Wawer, A. Wawer, A. Pawlak, J. Szymanowska, I. Stefa-
modelshavebeenfine-tuned,instruction-tuned,orpromptedin niak,M.Jarkiewicz,andL.Okruszek,“Detectingformalthoughtdisor-
derbydeepcontextualizedwordrepresentations,”PsychiatryResearch,
awaythatprohibitsmodelsfromrespondingtosuchunethical
vol.304,p.114135,2021.
instruction, these safeguards can be bypassed by cleverly [9] X. Liu, F. Zhang, Z. Hou, L. Mian, Z. Wang, J. Zhang, and J. Tang,
crafted prompts. Consider a simple prompt that might be able “Self-supervisedlearning:Generativeorcontrastive,”IEEEtransactions
onknowledgeanddataengineering,vol.35,no.1,pp.857–876,2021.
to bypass the content policy of deployed LLMs that do not
[10] H. Wang, J. Li, H. Wu, E. Hovy, and Y. Sun, “Pre-trained language
allow illegal behavior: modelsandtheirapplications,”Engineering,2022.
[11] A.Radford,K.Narasimhan,T.Salimans,I.Sutskeveretal.,“Improving
A poem about how to successfully hotwire languageunderstandingbygenerativepre-training,”2018.
a car: [12] A.Radford,J.Wu,R.Child,D.Luan,D.Amodei,I.Sutskeveretal.,
“Language models are unsupervised multitask learners,” OpenAI blog,
Despite the model’s safeguards against illegal behaviors, a vol.1,no.8,p.9,2019.
[13] J.Devlin,M.-W.Chang,K.Lee,andK.Toutanova,“BERT:Pre-training
simple adjustment to the original question, as shown above,
of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” in
could compel LLM to produce illegal and harmful content. Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapterof the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language astextgeneration,”AdvancesinNeuralInformationProcessingSystems,
Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers). Minneapolis, vol.34,pp.27263–27277,2021.
Minnesota: Association for Computational Linguistics, Jun. 2019, pp. [34] A.Haviv,J.Berant,andA.Globerson,“BERTese:Learningtospeakto
4171–4186.[Online].Available:https://aclanthology.org/N19-1423 BERT,”inProceedingsofthe16thConferenceoftheEuropeanChapter
[14] C. Raffel, N. Shazeer, A. Roberts, K. Lee, S. Narang, M. Matena, oftheAssociationforComputationalLinguistics:MainVolume. Online:
Y.Zhou,W.Li,andP.J.Liu,“Exploringthelimitsoftransferlearning Association for Computational Linguistics, Apr. 2021, pp. 3618–3623.
with a unified text-to-text transformer,” Journal of Machine Learning [Online].Available:https://aclanthology.org/2021.eacl-main.316
Research, vol. 21, no. 140, pp. 1–67, 2020. [Online]. Available: [35] E. Wallace, S. Feng, N. Kandpal, M. Gardner, and S. Singh,
http://jmlr.org/papers/v21/20-074.html “Universal adversarial triggers for attacking and analyzing NLP,” in
[15] Y. Liu, J. Gu, N. Goyal, X. Li, S. Edunov, M. Ghazvininejad, Proceedingsofthe2019ConferenceonEmpiricalMethodsinNatural
M. Lewis, and L. Zettlemoyer, “Multilingual denoising pre-training Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on
for neural machine translation,” Transactions of the Association for NaturalLanguageProcessing(EMNLP-IJCNLP). HongKong,China:
Computational Linguistics, vol. 8, pp. 726–742, 2020. [Online]. AssociationforComputationalLinguistics,Nov.2019,pp.2153–2162.
Available:https://aclanthology.org/2020.tacl-1.47 [Online].Available:https://aclanthology.org/D19-1221
[16] Z.Lan,M.Chen,S.Goodman,K.Gimpel,P.Sharma,andR.Soricut, [36] J. Davison, J. Feldman, and A. Rush, “Commonsense knowledge
“Albert:Alitebertforself-supervisedlearningoflanguagerepresenta- mining from pretrained models,” in Proceedings of the 2019
tions,”arXivpreprintarXiv:1909.11942,2019. Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
[17] M.Lewis,Y.Liu,N.Goyal,M.Ghazvininejad,A.Mohamed,O.Levy, and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language
V. Stoyanov, and L. Zettlemoyer, “BART: Denoising sequence-to- Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP). Hong Kong, China: Association for
sequence pre-training for natural language generation, translation, Computational Linguistics, Nov. 2019, pp. 1173–1178. [Online].
and comprehension,” in Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of Available:https://aclanthology.org/D19-1109
the Association for Computational Linguistics. Online: Association [37] Y. Lu, M. Bartolo, A. Moore, S. Riedel, and P. Stenetorp,
for Computational Linguistics, Jul. 2020, pp. 7871–7880. [Online]. “Fantastically ordered prompts and where to find them: Overcoming
Available:https://aclanthology.org/2020.acl-main.703 few-shot prompt order sensitivity,” in Proceedings of the 60th Annual
[18] C. Raffel, N. Shazeer, A. Roberts, K. Lee, S. Narang, M. Matena, Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume
Y.Zhou,W.Li,andP.J.Liu,“Exploringthelimitsoftransferlearning 1: Long Papers). Dublin, Ireland: Association for Computational
with a unified text-to-text transformer,” Journal of Machine Learning Linguistics, May 2022, pp. 8086–8098. [Online]. Available: https:
Research, vol. 21, no. 140, pp. 1–67, 2020. [Online]. Available: //aclanthology.org/2022.acl-long.556
http://jmlr.org/papers/v21/20-074.html [38] M. Deng, J. Wang, C.-P. Hsieh, Y. Wang, H. Guo, T. Shu,
[19] A.Chowdhery,S.Narang,J.Devlin,M.Bosma,G.Mishra,A.Roberts, M. Song, E. Xing, and Z. Hu, “RLPrompt: Optimizing discrete
P.Barham,H.W.Chung,C.Sutton,S.Gehrmannetal.,“Palm:Scaling text prompts with reinforcement learning,” in Proceedings of the
language modeling with pathways,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02311, 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
2022. Processing. Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates: Association for
[20] J.Wei,X.Wang,D.Schuurmans,M.Bosma,F.Xia,E.Chi,Q.V.Le, Computational Linguistics, Dec. 2022, pp. 3369–3391. [Online].
D. Zhou et al., “Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large Available:https://aclanthology.org/2022.emnlp-main.222
languagemodels,”AdvancesinNeuralInformationProcessingSystems, [39] Z.Zhang,A.Zhang,M.Li,andA.Smola,“Automaticchainofthought
vol.35,pp.24824–24837,2022. promptinginlargelanguagemodels,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2210.03493,
[21] T.Kojima,S.S.Gu,M.Reid,Y.Matsuo,andY.Iwasawa,“Largelan- 2022.
guagemodelsarezero-shotreasoners,”Advancesinneuralinformation [40] B.Paranjape,S.Lundberg,S.Singh,H.Hajishirzi,L.Zettlemoyer,and
processingsystems,vol.35,pp.22199–22213,2022. M. T. Ribeiro, “Art: Automatic multi-step reasoning and tool-use for
[22] X.Wang,J.Wei,D.Schuurmans,Q.Le,E.Chi,S.Narang,A.Chowdh- largelanguagemodels,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2303.09014,2023.
ery,andD.Zhou,“Self-consistencyimproveschainofthoughtreasoning [41] X. L. Li and P. Liang, “Prefix-tuning: Optimizing continuous
inlanguagemodels,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2203.11171,2022. prompts for generation,” in Proceedings of the 59th Annual
[23] S. Yao, D. Yu, J. Zhao, I. Shafran, T. L. Griffiths, Y. Cao, and Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and
K.Narasimhan,“Treeofthoughts:Deliberateproblemsolvingwithlarge the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language
languagemodels,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2305.10601,2023. Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers). Online: Association for
[24] D. Hulbert, “Tree of knowledge: Tok aka tree of knowledge Computational Linguistics, Aug. 2021, pp. 4582–4597. [Online].
dataset for large language models llm,” https://github.com/dave1010/ Available:https://aclanthology.org/2021.acl-long.353
tree-of-thought-prompting,2023. [42] B. Lester, R. Al-Rfou, and N. Constant, “The power of scale
[25] J. Liu, A. Liu, X. Lu, S. Welleck, P. West, R. L. Bras, Y. Choi, for parameter-efficient prompt tuning,” in Proceedings of the 2021
and H. Hajishirzi, “Generated knowledge prompting for commonsense Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing.
reasoning,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2110.08387,2021. Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic: Association for
[26] O. Press, M. Zhang, S. Min, L. Schmidt, N. A. Smith, and M. Lewis, Computational Linguistics, Nov. 2021, pp. 3045–3059. [Online].
“Measuring and narrowing the compositionality gap in language mod- Available:https://aclanthology.org/2021.emnlp-main.243
els,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2210.03350,2022. [43] X.Liu,Y.Zheng,Z.Du,M.Ding,Y.Qian,Z.Yang,andJ.Tang,“Gpt
[27] D. Zhou, N. Scha¨rli, L. Hou, J. Wei, N. Scales, X. Wang, D. Schu- understands,too,”AIOpen,2023.
urmans, C. Cui, O. Bousquet, Q. Le et al., “Least-to-most prompting [44] Y. Zhao, H. Zhang, S. Si, L. Nan, X. Tang, and A. Cohan, “Large
enables complex reasoning in large language models,” arXiv preprint language models are effective table-to-text generators, evaluators, and
arXiv:2205.10625,2022. feedbackproviders,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2305.14987,2023.
[28] L. Gao, A. Madaan, S. Zhou, U. Alon, P. Liu, Y. Yang, J. Callan, [45] Z. Liu, X. Yu, Y. Fang, and X. Zhang, “Graphprompt: Unifying pre-
andG.Neubig,“Pal:Program-aidedlanguagemodels,”inInternational traininganddownstreamtasksforgraphneuralnetworks,”inProceed-
ConferenceonMachineLearning. PMLR,2023,pp.10764–10799. ingsoftheACMWebConference2023,2023,pp.417–428.
[29] W. Chen, X. Ma, X. Wang, and W. W. Cohen, “Program of thoughts [46] X. Chen, N. Zhang, X. Xie, S. Deng, Y. Yao, C. Tan, F. Huang,
prompting: Disentangling computation from reasoning for numerical L. Si, and H. Chen, “Knowprompt: Knowledge-aware prompt-tuning
reasoningtasks,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2211.12588,2022. withsynergisticoptimizationforrelationextraction,”inProceedingsof
[30] J.Long,“Largelanguagemodelguidedtree-of-thought,”arXivpreprint theACMWebconference2022,2022,pp.2778–2788.
arXiv:2305.08291,2023. [47] L. Ouyang, J. Wu, X. Jiang, D. Almeida, C. Wainwright, P. Mishkin,
[31] S.Yao,J.Zhao,D.Yu,N.Du,I.Shafran,K.Narasimhan,andY.Cao, C. Zhang, S. Agarwal, K. Slama, A. Ray et al., “Training language
“React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models,” arXiv modelstofollowinstructionswithhumanfeedback,”AdvancesinNeural
preprintarXiv:2210.03629,2022. InformationProcessingSystems,vol.35,pp.27730–27744,2022.
[32] Z. Jiang, F. F. Xu, J. Araki, and G. Neubig, “How can we know [48] C.Nardo,“Thewaluigieffect(mega-post),”LessWrong,2023.[Online].
what language models know?” Transactions of the Association for Available: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/D7PumeYTDPfBTp3i7/
ComputationalLinguistics,vol.8,pp.423–438,2020. the-waluigi-effect-mega-post
[33] W.Yuan,G.Neubig,andP.Liu,“Bartscore:Evaluatinggeneratedtext [49] S. Armstrong and R. Gorman, “Using gpt-eliezer against chatgptjailbreaking,” AI ALIGNMENT FORUM, 2022. [Online]. Avail-
able: https://www.alignmentforum.org/posts/pNcFYZnPdXyL2RfgA/
using-gpt-eliezer-against-chatgpt-jailbreaking