Context Awareness Gate For Retrieval Augmented
Generation
Mohammad Hassan Heydari Arshia Hemmat Erfan Naman Afsaneh Fatemi
Computer Engineering Faculty Computer Engineering Faculty Computer Engineering Facu. Computer Engineering Faculty
University of Isfahan University of Isfahan University of Isfahan University of Isfahan
Isfahan, Iran Isfahan, Iran Isfahan, Iran Isfahan, Iran
mheydarii@mehr.ui.ac.ir arshiahemmat@mehr.ui.ac.ir erfannaman@mehr.ui.ac.ir a fatemi@eng.ui.ac.ir
Abstract—Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) has proaches contribute to more accurate and effective retrieval
emerged as a widely adopted approach to mitigate the of information.
limitations of large language models (LLMs) in answering
Despite ongoing efforts to develop more reliable retrieval
domain-specific questions. Previous research has predominantly
methods for extracting relevant data chunks, many question-
focusedonimprovingtheaccuracyandqualityofretrieveddata
chunks to enhance the overall performance of the generation answering systems do not solely rely on local or domain-
pipeline. However, despite ongoing advancements, the critical specific datasets for answering user queries. In addition to
issue of retrieving irrelevant information—which can impair a domain-specific user queries, many input queries do not
model’s ability to utilize its internal knowledge effectively—has
necessitate retrieval from local datasets, which reduces the
received minimal attention. In this work, we investigate the
scalability and reliability of question-answering systems [11].
impact of retrieving irrelevant information in open-domain
questionanswering,highlightingitssignificantdetrimentaleffect To tackle this limitation, retrieval methods based on query
on the quality of LLM outputs. To address this challenge, we classification and routing mechanisms have proven effective
proposetheContextAwarenessGate(CAG)architecture,anovel in enhancing retrieval accuracy by directing the search toward
mechanism that dynamically adjusts the LLM’s input prompt
a set of documents closely related to the user’s query [10].
based on whether the user query necessitates external context
However,inourstudy,wedemonstratethatevenwithsemantic
retrieval. Additionally, we introduce the Vector Candidates
method, a core mathematical component of CAG that is routing, the probability of retrieving irrelevant information
statistical, LLM-independent, and highly scalable. We further remainsnon-negligible,particularlywhendealingwithabroad
examine the distributions of relationships between contexts and domain of potential queries.
questions, presenting a statistical analysis of these distributions. Due to the inherently local search mechanism of Retrieval-
This analysis can be leveraged to enhance the context retrieval
Augmented Generation (RAG) systems [1], [12], even for
process in retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) systems.
queries that are largely irrelevant, the pipeline will still return
Index Terms—Retrieval-Augmented Generation, Hallucina-
tion,LargeLanguageModels,OpenDomainQuestionAnswering a set number of passages. While existing research has made
strides in addressing the challenge of imperfect data retrieval
[11],[13],[14],theissueofbroad-domainquestionanswering
in RAG systems has received relatively little attention.
I. INTRODUCTION
Many queries submitted to RAG-enhanced question-
Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) has emerged as a answering (QA) systems do not require data retrieval, such as
leading approach for implementing question-answering sys- dailyconversations,generalknowledgequestions,orquestions
tems that require intensive domain-specific knowledge [1]. that large language models (LLMs) themselves can answer
This method allows for the utilization of customized datasets using their internal knowledge [10], [11], [15]. Retrieving
to generate answers, grounded in the information provided passages for all input queries, especially in these cases, can
by those datasets. However, the effectiveness of the retrieval significantly diminish the retrieval precision [11] and the con-
component within RAG pipelines is critical, as it directly text relevancy [16], often rendering them entirely irrelevant.
influences the reliability and quality of the generated outputs To address this issue, we propose a novel context-aware
[2], [3]. gate architecture for RAG-enhanced systems which is highly
In efforts to enhance the quality of the retrieval component scalable of dynamically routing the LLM input prompt to
inRAGpipelines,researchhasdemonstratedthattransforming increase the quality of pipeline outputs.
theuser’sinputqueryintovaryinglevelsofabstractionbefore For better comprehension of our work, we highlight three
conducting the document search can significantly improve main contributions in this study:
the relevance of the retrieved data. Several methods have • Context Awareness Gate (CAG): We introduce a novel
been proposed, including query expansion into multi-query gate architecture that significantly broadens the domain
searches, chain of verification [4], [5], pseudo-context search accessibilityofRAGsystems.CAGleveragesbothquery
[6] and query transformation [7], [8], [9], [10]. These ap- transformation and dynamic prompting to enhance the
4202
voN
52
]GL.sc[
1v33161.1142:viXrareliability of RAG pipelines in both open-domain and al. (2024) [20] argue that simply adding more context to the
closed-domain question answering tasks. LLMinputpromptdoesnotnecessarilyimproveperformance.
• Vector Candidates (VC): We propose a statistical se- In a recent and highly relevant study, Wang et al. (2024)
mantic analysis algorithm that improves semantic search [11] show that when retrieval precision is below 20%, RAG
and routing by utilizing the concept of pseudo-queries is not beneficial for QA systems. They highlight that when
and in-dataset embedding distributions. retrievalprecisionapproacheszero,theRAGpipelineperforms
• Context Retrieval Supervision Benchmark (CRSB) significantly worse than a pipeline without RAG.
Dataset:Alongsideourtechnicalandstatisticalinvestiga-
tions, we introduce the CRSB dataset, which consists of
III. APPROACH
data from 17 diverse fields. We study the inner context- To address the challenges associated with retrieving irrele-
query distributions of this rich dataset and demonstrate vantinformation[11],weproposetheContextAwarenessGate
the effectiveness and scalability of Vector Candidates on (CAG) architecture, which utilizes Vector Candidates as its
practical QA systems 1 . primary statistical method for query classification. CAG sig-
nificantlyimprovestheperformanceofopen-domainquestion-
answering systems by dynamically adjusting the input prompt
for the LLM, transitioning from RAG-based context prompts
to Few Shot, Chain-of-Thought (CoT) [4], [5], and other
methodologies. Consequently, the LLM responds to user
queries based on its internal knowledge base.
A. Context Awareness Gate (CAG)
To address the issue of retrieving irrelevant data chunks for
each input query, one solution is to ask a supervising large
language model (LLM) to classify whether the query should
promptaretrieval-augmentedgeneration(RAG)oraRAG-free
response. This involves determining whether the input query
fallswithinthescopeofthelocaldatabase.However,asignif-
icantlimitationofthisapproachisthehighcomputationalcost
of using an LLM with billions of parameters for a relatively
simple task like query classification. Even smaller language
models come with their own challenges, such as hallucination
Fig. 1. Context Awareness Gate (CAG) architecture for open domain and limited reasoning capabilities [11].
questionsanswering
To mitigate these issues,we propose an efficient yet highly
effective statistical approach, known as Vector Candidates.
II. RELATEDWORK The key idea behind Vector Candidates is to generate pseudo-
queries for each document in the set, then calculate the dis-
improving both retrieval quality and the outputs of large
tribution of embeddings and their similarities. By comparing
language models. Query2Doc [17] and HyDE [6] generate
the input query to this distribution, it is possible to estimate
pseudo-documents based on the input query and utilize these
whether context retrieval is necessary with a certain level of
for semantic search instead of the query itself. RQ-RAG
probability. If the input query is far from this distribution,
[18] decomposes complex queries into simpler sub-queries,
it is recommended not to retrieve any context and instead
enhancing retrieval performance. The Rewrite-Retrieve-Read
reformulate the LLM input prompt into a simpler few-shot
framework [7] employs query rewriting to improve the match
question-answering task, rather than utilizing RAG. The over-
between queries and relevant documents. Additionally, some
all architecture of CAG is presented in figure 1
studies suggest that for queries answerable by the large lan-
The limitation of this approach may appear to be the
guage model (LLM) based on its internal knowledge, query
necessity of generating numerous pseudo-queries for a local
classification using a smaller language model can benefit
dataset. However, when comparing it to LLM supervision,
overall pipeline performance [10].
the complexity of the Vector Candidates method, which op-
Intermsofimprovingmodeloutputquality,RobustRAG[3]
erates on a set of contexts with C contexts and N pipeline
investigates the vulnerability of RAG-based systems to mali-
input requests, reveals a significant advantage. Specifically,
ciouspassagesinjectedintotheknowledgedatabase.Conflict-
the complexity of the Vector Candidates method is O(1), as
Disentangle Contrastive Decoding (CD2) [19] proposes a
it relies solely on the number of contexts, regardless of the
framework to reconcile conflicts between an LLM’s internal
number of input requests ( This happens when we disable the
knowledgeandexternalknowledgestoredinadatabase.Yuet
query transformation as one of the CAG steps ) . In contrast,
the complexity of LLM supervision scales linearly with the
1The CRSB dataset is available at: https://huggingface.co/datasets/
heydariAI/CRSB numberofinputrequests,representedasO(N).Thisindicatesthat while generating pseudo-queries may seem cumbersome, hyperparameter derived from common statistical metrics such
the overall efficiency of the Vector Candidates approach is as minimum, mean, median, or quartiles. Additionally, we
superior in scenarios with multiple input requests. defineathresholdT,whichservesasanotherhyperparameter,
Alongside all the steps involved in the Vector Candidates to create a risk range for decision-making. This threshold
approach,theprocessbeginswithtransformingtheuser’sinput helps in determining the confidence level for whether context
query into a more appropriate format to enhance the quality retrieval should be applied, balancing the trade-off between
of semantic search. This query transformation is critical as precision and recall in the retrieval process.
it ensures that the input is optimized for better alignment
C. Context Retrieval Supervision Bench (CRSB)
with the embeddings used in the retrieval process. After this
transformation, the Vector Candidates method is applied to We introduce the Context Retrieval Supervision Bench
assess the relevance of context retrieval. (CRSB) dataset, which can be used to evaluate the per-
FollowingquerytransformationandVectorCandidatesanal- formance of context-aware systems and retrieval-augmented
ysis, the Context-Adaptive Generation (CAG) system dynam- generation (RAG) semantic routers. The CRSB contains 17
ically adapts the input query into a suitable prompt. This different topics, with each context associated with 3 pseudo-
involves determining whether context retrieval is necessary queries. This design allows the CRSB to encompass a total
or if the LLM can answer the query based on its internal of 5,100 question-answer pairs. With a correct permutation,
knowledge, utilizing techniques like Chain of Thought (CoT) CRSB can offer more than 83000 context-query pairs to
reasoning [4], [5], agents, or other methods. evaluate the context awareness systems and semantic routing
pipelines..
B. Vector Candidates
IV. EXPERIMENTS
To address the issues of using a LLM for context su-
Toanalyzethestatisticalrelationshipsbetweenrelevantand
pervision , we propose a statistical approach based on the
irrelevant context-query pairs, we examine the distribution of
distributions of emmbedings of contexts and pseudo-queries.
collected contexts and generated pseudo-queries. We begin by
Algorithm 1 Vector Candidates Algorithm gathering 1,700 contexts across 17 distinct topics. For each
context, we prompt the Gemma 2 9B language model [21] to
Require: ContextsC,PseudoQueriesQ,PolicyP,Threshold
generatethreepseudo-queries.Weappliedall−mpnet−base−
T, Input Query q
v2 as our embedding model and create a vector database of
Ensure: A classification (True or False)
contexts and pseudo-queries embeddings [22].
1: Compute dataset distributions based on cosine similarity:
We then calculate the similarity distributions for Positive
C·Q
D ← (relevant) context-query pairs, where the queries require con-
∥C∥∥Q∥ text retrieval, as well as for Negative (irrelevant) context-
querypairs.Withappropriatepermutations,weanalyze83,000
2: Compute input query similarities with contexts: Positive and Negative context-query pairs. Various statistical
C·q metrics are applied to these distributions, and the results are
d←
∥C∥∥q∥ presented in Table I.
3: if max(d)>P(D)−T then TABLEI
4: return True
STATISTICALANALYSISONCRSB
5: else
6: return False Policy Positive Negative
7: end if Minimum 0.110 -0.193
5thPercentile 0.554 -0.052
1stQuartile 0.662 -0.000
Based on the proposed method in Algorithm (1), we first Mean 0.705 0.047
calculate the cosine similarity distributions between the con- Median 0.716 0.039
3rdQuartile 0.762 0.086
texts and pseudo-queries. Then, we compute the similarity
95thPercentile 0.836 0.219
between the user’s original query and each context in the Maximum 0.912 0.654
dataset. If the maximum similarity found between the orig-
inal query and the contexts falls within the distribution of As demonstrated in Table I, over 95% of positive context-
context-pseudo-query similarities, this suggests that retrieval- question pairs exhibit a cosine similarity greater than 0.55,
augmented generation (RAG) might be beneficial. Otherwise, while more than 95% of negative context-query pairs have
it is more efficient to exclude RAG from the pipeline. This a cosine similarity lower than 0.21. The median value for
approachisgroundedinourstatisticalanalysisandtheresults the positive set exceeds 0.71, whereas the median for the
presented by Wang et al. [11]. negativesetisbelow0.04.Althoughthemaximumvalueofthe
To measure the relevancy between the described distribu- negative set is higher than the minimum value of the positive
tions and the user query, we apply a policy P, which is a set, the density of the positive distribution is greater thanthat of the negative distribution approximately 98.7% of the Our experimental evaluation demonstrates the superior per-
time. These statistics provide a comprehensive understanding formance of our method, CAG, in terms of both context rel-
that, by utilizing these metrics as a policy, we can develop evancy and answer relevancy across different datasets. When
a statistical method that is highly effective in classifying user applied to the SQuAD dataset [24], the baseline model RAG
queriestoestablishdynamicprompts,asdiscussedinprevious achieved a context relevancy score of 0.06 and an answer
sections. relevancyscoreof0.186,highlightingsignificantlimitationsin
Due to the algebraic nature of our method, we have in- capturing and retrieving relevant information. In contrast, our
tegrated advanced high-performance techniques for parallel CAGapproachdramaticallyimprovedthesemetrics,achieving
computing and accelerated linear algebra through the JAX a context relevancy of 0.684 and answer relevancy of 0.821.
framework[23].LeveragingJAX’sabilitytohandleautomatic Thisindicatesasubstantialenhancementinthemodel’sability
differentiation and just-in-time compilation (JIT) seamlessly, to retrieve and understand contextually relevant information
we are able to optimize the underlying computations for both and provide more accurate answers.
CPU and GPU architectures. This not only allows for faster Furthermore, applying our CAG architecture to the CRSB
execution but also ensures scalability across large datasets dataset yielded even stronger results, with context relevancy
and complex models. Our approach significantly improves reaching 0.783 and answer relevancy rising to 0.84. These
the efficiency in computing the distributions of the dataset, findings suggest that our approach not only generalizes well
offering a more streamlined and scalable solution for high- across datasets but also significantly enhances the system’s
dimensional data analysis 2 . overall comprehension and open domain question answering
capabilities.
V. RESULTS AccordingtotherepresentedresultsintableII,weconclude
ToevaluatethecapabilitiesandperformanceoftheContext that open domain question answering using RAG on a closed
Awareness Gate (CAG), we applied this architecture to the database , significantly reduces the reliability of the QA
SQuADdataset[24]andourproposedbenchmark,CRSB.We systems;whichconfirmstheresultsofwangetal.(2024)[11].
implemented an open-domain question-answering pipeline to
VI. CONCLUSION
assess the outcomes of CAG under two approaches:
WhileRAGpresentsawidelyadoptedapproachforquestion
• Setting CRSB as the local dataset while querying from
answeringusinglocaldatabases,itexhibitsnotablelimitations
SQuAD [24]. The pipeline should identify irrelevant
in open-domain question answering . Previous research has
queriestothedatasetandrefrainfromusingRAG,instead
seldom addressed the critical issue that retrieving irrelevant
generating a few-shot response using the LLM input
data chunks can detract from the model’s ability to generate
prompt.
accurate responses, particularly when relying on the model’s
• Setting CRSB as the local dataset and querying about
internal knowledge.
informationwithinCRSB.Thepipelineshouldrecognize
In this study, we propose a novel, statistically-driven, and
the need for context retrieval and manage queries to
highly scalable approach to mitigate this challenge. Our
retrieve relevant data according to RAG steps.
method, the Context Awareness Gate (CAG), dynamically
For both approaches, we evaluate using two metrics from
adjuststhemodel’sinputdomain,refiningtheretrievalprocess
RAGAS: context relevancy and answer relevancy [16]. In
basedonthesemanticrelevanceofthedatatotheuser’squery.
the first approach, due to the absence of retrieved context,
This adaptive mechanism enhances the model’s capability to
we ask our model to generate a pseudo-context that answers
provide more accurate answers by optimizing its interaction
the query and then calculate the context relevancy based on
with the dataset.
this generated context. Our question-answering base model is
OpenAI GPT-4o mini. To demonstrate the effectivenessof the VII. FUTUREDIRECTION
proposed pipeline, we compare the results of the classic RAG This work opens up several promising avenues for further
and the proposed CAG. research and enhancement of Context Awareness Gate (CAG)
Fortheevaluationstep,weappliedbothRAGandCAG.We in open-domain question answering systems:
set 95% density distribution as the Policy P and we set the
• IncorporatingBestPracticesinInformationRetrieval:
threshold T to 0 as the Vector Candidates hyperparameters.
Futureworkcouldfocusonintegratingthemethodologies
outlined in [15] to refine CAG’s information retrieval
TABLEII pipeline.Specifically,thesepracticescouldoptimizehow
EVALUATIONOFCONTEXT-AWAREGENERATION(CAG)ONSQUADAND
CAG filters and ranks relevant information, leading to
CRSB
evenmoreprecisedataselection.Byenhancingthegran-
ContextRelevancy AnswerRelevancy ularity of relevance scoring during retrieval, CAG could
SQuADonRAG 0.06 0.186 furtherimproveitsabilitytoidentifyandutilizethemost
SQuADonCAG(Ours) 0.684 0.821
CRSBonCAG(Ours) 0.783 0.84 contextually pertinent chunks of information, boosting
both retrieval accuracy and downstream performance in
2Ourprojectisavailableat:https://github.com/heydaari/CAG generating high-quality responses.• Replacing Pseudo-Context Search with Pseudo-Query [18] C.-M. Chan, C. Xu, R. Yuan, H. Luo, W. Xue, Y. Guo, and J. Fu,
Search: While the pseudo-context search strategy pro- “Rq-rag:Learningtorefinequeriesforretrievalaugmentedgeneration,”
arXivpreprintarXiv:2404.00610,2024.
posed in HyDE [6] has been effective, this study intro-
[19] Z. Jin, P. Cao, Y. Chen, K. Liu, X. Jiang, J. Xu, Q. Li, and
ducestheconceptofpseudo-querysearchasapotentially J. Zhao, “Tug-of-war between knowledge: Exploring and resolving
more robust alternative. Future research could explore knowledge conflicts in retrieval-augmented language models,” arXiv
preprintarXiv:2402.14409,2024.
the efficacy of this approach across various datasets and
[20] Y. Yu, W. Ping, Z. Liu, B. Wang, J. You, C. Zhang, M. Shoeybi,
domains. A systematic evaluation of the pseudo-query and B. Catanzaro, “Rankrag: Unifying context ranking with retrieval-
search could reveal whether it generalizes better across augmentedgenerationinllms,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2407.02485,2024.
[21] G.Team,M.Riviere,S.Pathak,P.G.Sessa,C.Hardin,S.Bhupatiraju,
differentquestion-answeringtasks,especiallyincomplex
L. Hussenot, T. Mesnard, B. Shahriari, A. Rame´ et al., “Gemma 2:
or multi-turn dialogues, where context awareness is cru- Improving open language models at a practical size,” arXiv preprint
cial for maintaining conversation coherence. arXiv:2408.00118,2024.
[22] N. Reimers and I. Gurevych, “Sentence-bert: Sentence embeddings
using siamese bert-networks,” in Proceedings of the 2019 Conference
REFERENCES on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing. Association
for Computational Linguistics, 11 2019. [Online]. Available: https:
//arxiv.org/abs/1908.10084
[1] P. Lewis, E. Perez, A. Piktus, F. Petroni, V. Karpukhin, N. Goyal,
[23] A. Roberts, H. W. Chung, G. Mishra, A. Levskaya, J. Bradbury,
H. Ku¨ttler, M. Lewis, W.-t. Yih, T. Rockta¨schel et al., “Retrieval-
D. Andor, S. Narang, B. Lester, C. Gaffney, A. Mohiuddin et al.,
augmented generation for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks,” Advances in
“Scaling up models and data with t5x and seqio,” Journal of Machine
NeuralInformationProcessingSystems,vol.33,pp.9459–9474,2020.
LearningResearch,vol.24,no.377,pp.1–8,2023.
[2] J. Chen, H. Lin, X. Han, and L. Sun, “Benchmarking large language
[24] P. Rajpurkar, “Squad: 100,000+ questions for machine comprehension
modelsinretrieval-augmentedgeneration,”inProceedingsoftheAAAI
oftext,”arXivpreprintarXiv:1606.05250,2016.
ConferenceonArtificialIntelligence,vol.38,no.16,2024,pp.17754–
17762.
[3] C. Xiang, T. Wu, Z. Zhong, D. Wagner, D. Chen, and P. Mittal,
“Certifiably robust rag against retrieval corruption,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2405.15556,2024.
[4] S.Dhuliawala,M.Komeili,J.Xu,R.Raileanu,X.Li,A.Celikyilmaz,
and J. Weston, “Chain-of-verification reduces hallucination in large
languagemodels,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2309.11495,2023.
[5] J.Wei,X.Wang,D.Schuurmans,M.Bosma,F.Xia,E.Chi,Q.V.Le,
D. Zhou et al., “Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large
languagemodels,”Advancesinneuralinformationprocessingsystems,
vol.35,pp.24824–24837,2022.
[6] L.Gao,X.Ma,J.Lin,andJ.Callan,“Precisezero-shotdenseretrieval
withoutrelevancelabels,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2212.10496,2022.
[7] X. Ma, Y. Gong, P. He, H. Zhao, and N. Duan, “Query rewrit-
ing for retrieval-augmented large language models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.14283,2023.
[8] W. Peng, G. Li, Y. Jiang, Z. Wang, D. Ou, X. Zeng, D. Xu, T. Xu,
and E. Chen, “Large language model based long-tail query rewriting
in taobao search,” in Companion Proceedings of the ACM on Web
Conference2024,2024,pp.20–28.
[9] H. S. Zheng, S. Mishra, X. Chen, H.-T. Cheng, E. H. Chi, Q. V. Le,
and D. Zhou, “Take a step back: Evoking reasoning via abstraction in
largelanguagemodels,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2310.06117,2023.
[10] Y. Gao, Y. Xiong, X. Gao, K. Jia, J. Pan, Y. Bi, Y. Dai, J. Sun, and
H. Wang, “Retrieval-augmented generation for large language models:
Asurvey,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2312.10997,2023.
[11] F. Wang, X. Wan, R. Sun, J. Chen, and S. O¨. Arık, “Astute rag:
Overcoming imperfect retrieval augmentation and knowledge conflicts
forlargelanguagemodels,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2410.07176,2024.
[12] K. Guu, K. Lee, Z. Tung, P. Pasupat, and M. Chang, “Retrieval
augmented language model pre-training,” in International conference
onmachinelearning. PMLR,2020,pp.3929–3938.
[13] Z. Jin, P. Cao, Y. Chen, K. Liu, X. Jiang, J. Xu, Q. Li, and
J. Zhao, “Tug-of-war between knowledge: Exploring and resolving
knowledge conflicts in retrieval-augmented language models,” arXiv
preprintarXiv:2402.14409,2024.
[14] A.Mallen,A.Asai,V.Zhong,R.Das,D.Khashabi,andH.Hajishirzi,
“Whennottotrustlanguagemodels:Investigatingeffectivenessofpara-
metricandnon-parametricmemories,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2212.10511,
2022.
[15] X.Wang,Z.Wang,X.Gao,F.Zhang,Y.Wu,Z.Xu,T.Shi,Z.Wang,
S.Li,Q.Qianetal.,“Searchingforbestpracticesinretrieval-augmented
generation,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2407.01219,2024.
[16] S. Es, J. James, L. Espinosa-Anke, and S. Schockaert, “Ragas: Au-
tomated evaluation of retrieval augmented generation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2309.15217,2023.
[17] L.Wang,N.Yang,andF.Wei,“Query2doc:Queryexpansionwithlarge
languagemodels,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2303.07678,2023.