4202
luJ
4
]LC.sc[
1v55930.7042:viXra
Meta-prompting Optimized Retrieval-augmented
Generation
João Rodrigues and António Branco
Universityof Lisbon
NLX—NaturalLanguage and Speech Group, Dept of Informatics
Faculdade deCiências (FCUL), Campo Grande, 1749-016 Lisboa, Portugal
{jarodrigues,antonio.branco}@fc.ul.pt
Abstract. Retrieval-augmented generation resorts to content retrieved
from external sources in order to leverage the performance of large lan-
guage models in downstream tasks. The excessive volume of retrieved
content, the possible dispersion of its parts, or their out of focus range
mayhappenneverthelesstoeventuallyhaveadetrimentalratherthanan
incrementaleffect.Tomitigatethisissueandimproveretrieval-augmented
generation,weproposeamethodtorefinetheretrievedcontentbeforeit
is included in theprompt by resorting to meta-promptingoptimization.
Put to empirical test with the demanding multi-hop question answer-
ing task from the StrategyQA dataset, the evaluation results indicate
that this method outperforms a similar retrieval-augmented system but
without this method by over30 %.
Keywords: RAG · Retrieval-Augmented Generation · Prompt Opti-
mization · Large Language Models · Meta-prompting · Multi-hop QA
1 Introduction
Pre-trained Large Language Models (LLMs) [32,22] are known for their hallu-
cinations [12] and for their further limitations regarding truthfulness [17]. To
tackle these issues, remediation techniques have been explored such as, for in-
stance, fine-tuning [10], prompt-engineering [18] or Retrieval-Augmented Gen-
eration [15], initiated by Houlsby et al. [9] among several others.
1.1 Retrieval-augmented generation
Focusing on Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG), this approach seeks to
enhance truthfulness and curb hallucinations by expanding the initial prompt,
which contains the initial query, with additional content retrieved from sources
that are external to the LLM. Such additional content is obtained with the
help of an auxiliary Retrieval Model where the retrieval model may be a simple
Jacquardmodeloravectordatabasethatextractsrelevantcontentfromexternal
sourcesandpassitontoaLargeLanguageModelthatgeneratesanappropriate
response given the original query and the extracted content. If this external2 João Rodrigues and AntónioBranco
content is unstructured text, it may be of different lengths, such as sentences,
paragraphs or full documents, among others.
By feeding LLM’s knowledge,and curbing its whim, with further knowledge
from external sources, more accurate answers are likely to be provided.
Comparedwithother techniques,suchasfine-tuning orprompt-engineering,
RAG key advantage is the ease with which newer, up-to-date content is taken
advantage of, as this does not require the costly compute of re-training neural
networks(asinfine-tuning)orthecostlyhumanlabourforthecreationoffurther
manually designed prompts (as in prompt-engineering). To be sure, all these
techniques can nevertheless be mixed and function together.
1.2 Prompt optimization
Usually, the pieces of content retrieved may be from heterogeneous sources and
theytendtolackaconnectingthread.Theymayalsoberedundantormaybeof
veryhighvolume.These,amongotheraspects,mayenduphavingadetrimental
effectandeventuallyjeopardizingthe generationtask,ratherthanenhancing it.
To mitigate this problem, we present a method that consists of adding an
intermediate step between the retrievalof the external contentand the entering
of the expanded prompt into the LLM to finally obtain the response to the
initialquery.Aiming atimprovingtheperformanceofthisgeneration-LLM,this
intermediate step seeks to obtain a refined version of the external knowledge.
This refinement is accomplished by means of an auxiliary transformation-
LLM that is entered with a prompt containing the pieces of retrieved contents,
preceded by an instruction with the request for the sought refinement.
For example, if several pages of Wikipedia are retrieved as possible relevant
content, the transformation-LLM processes this content and may generate a
summary or remove unnecessary information from that original content.
Turningto this refinementinstruction,this is obtainedbyanautomaticpro-
cedure that is preliminary to running the RAG system made of transformation-
and generation-LLMs, and it is undertaken by yet a third LLM.
Inspired in Yang et al. [35], in this procedure a meta-prompt is used as
input to this third, optimizer-LLMfor this to iteratively generate new tentative
instructions, score them, and retain, in the meta-prompt itself, a list with the
top k ones that induce better performance for the RAG system. By the end
of this optimization process, the best scoring instruction in this list is the one
retained to be used in the refinement step of the retrieved contents with the
transformation-LLM.
Thismeta-promptcontainsameta-instructionandalistoftentativeinstruc-
tions that is aimed at being updated during this process with new instructions
that induce better RAG performance. After a new tentative instruction is gen-
erated, its contribution to approximate the gold output to the initial query is
scored, and the list of tentative instructions in the meta-prompt is possibly up-
dated so that it retains the top-performing ones so far. This is iterated, and an
optimization trajectoryis hence accomplishedto eventually find the new refine-
ment instruction that maximizes the success of the RAG system.Meta-prompting Optimized Retrieval-augmented Generation 3
***
In this paper, we propose a method for RAG to be enhanced with the re-
finement of the retrievedcontent,a refinement that is optimized by resortingto
iterative meta-prompting. This is a novel method that can be combined with
previous approaches aimed at enhancing RAG.
Wereportontheexperimentsperformedtoputthismethodtothetest.This
approachisextrinsicallyevaluatedbybeingembeddedinademandingquestion-
answeringdownstreamtask.Its performancedemonstratesthatitis aneffective
method to enhance RAG by improving by 30% the performance of a baseline
RAG without this method, and that it can be combined with other previous
state of the art methods for RAG enhancement proposed in the literature.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: Section 2 discusses
related work; Section 3 describes the method proposed in this study; Section 4
reportsonthemodelsanddatasetresortedto;Section5presentstheexperiments
undertaken and their evaluation, and discusses the results obtained; Section 6
addresses future research paths; and finally, Section 7 closes this paper with
concluding remarks.
2 Related work
Promptoptimizationhasgainedtractionasaneffectivemechanismforenhancing
LLMs in several downstream tasks [1][14].
The earliest approaches in prompt optimization sought to directly optimize
the prompt embedding space, such as prefix-tuning [16] or OptiPrompt [37].
Theseaimedatoptimizingasequenceofcontinuoustask-specificvectorsapplied
to the prompt to leverage downstream tasks.
Morerecentstudies haveintroduced further techniques to enhance prompts,
such as chain-of-thought [34] and tree-of-thoughts [36]. The former involves ex-
tending prompts with a few manually written chain of thought demonstrations
asexamples,whichresultsinimprovedperformanceacrossvarioustasks,includ-
ingarithmetic,commonsenseandsymbolicreasoning.Thelatterbuildsuponthe
chain-of-thoughtbyconsideringmultiplereasoningpaths,self-evaluatingchoices,
andbymakingglobaldecisionsbylookingaheadorbacktrackingwhennecessary.
Other methods for optimizing prompts include searching through a pool of
prompt candidates generated by an LLM, employing principled planning algo-
rithms based on Monte Carlo tree search [33], or applying iterative local edit
operations at a syntactic phrase-levelsplit within the prompts [21].
FurtherproposalsencompassEvoPrompt[7],whichusesevolutionaryopera-
tors over a prompt population for optimization, while Sabbatella et al. employs
BayesianOptimizationwithinapromptsearchspace[26],reinforcementlearning
to rewrite prompts [13] or a prompt optimization that integrates human-design
feedback rules to suggest improvements automatically [5].
Recently, Yang et al. [35] introduced OPRO, leveraging LLMs as optimiz-
ers through meta-prompts, which are natural language descriptions that guide4 João Rodrigues and AntónioBranco
prompt optimization. It was applied to optimize prompts by retrieving and re-
rankingtop-Krelevantinstructionswithrespecttoaninitialinstruction,andby
appending them to the global task description.
In contrast, to enhance RAG, we propose a method to optimize the prompt
that differs from the previous proposals in the literature.
A promptfor RAG includes a query and the contentretrievedfromexternal
sources on the basis of that query. It may contain also an instruction about
how to handle the query or how the retrieved content should be used by the
generation-LLM to answer it. Related work for RAG enhanced with prompt
optimization has concentrated on optimizing the instruction and/or the query.
Differently frompreviousapproaches,our methodfocuses insteadonoptimizing
theversionoftheretrievedcontentthatisincludedinthepromptenteredintothe
generation-LLM. Hence, rather than being an approach alternative to previous
ones, it is a new one that is complementary to them and may be combined.
3 Method
TheobjectiveofourmethodistoenhancetheRAGperformanceofageneration-
LLMbymeansoftheimprovementofitsinputprompt,whichismadeofaquery
introducedbytheuserandofpiecesofcontentretrievedfromexternalsourceson
thebasisofthatquery.Beforeitisenteredintothegeneration-LLM,thisprompt
is improved by means of a refinement of the retrieved content, performed by a
transformation-LLM.
I have some prompts along with their corresponding scores. The prompts are arranged
in ascending order based on their scores, where higher scores indicate better quality.
Togetherwithrelevantinformationextractedfromadatabase,thesepromptsaregivenas
input to a large language model in order to optimizethe providedrelevant information.
Several techniques may help the optimization, such as re-ranking paragraphs, cleaning,
filtering and summarization. Write your new prompt taking into account the previous
onesandaimingtoachieveahigherscore.
prompt:
Summarizethemainideaoftheprevioustext.
score:
3.0
prompt:
Summarizethemainpointsin30wordsorless.
score:
3.0
Table 1.Meta-prompt-Anexampleofameta-prompt:inblack,thetopparagraph
withthemeta-instructionactuallyusedintheexperiments;below,ingreen,thelist of
top performing instructions so far, and therespective scores.
AndbeforeafirstqueryisacceptedtoputtheRAGsystemtouse,theprompt
to be used with the transformation-LLM for refinement purposes is optimized.Meta-prompting Optimized Retrieval-augmented Generation 5
Thispromptincludesarefinementinstructionandthepiecesofretrievedcontent
to be refined. It is optimized by means of the optimization of this instruction
through iterative meta-prompting.
This meta-prompting optimization is undertaken by an optimizer-LLM that
is entered with a (meta-)prompt that includes a (meta-)instruction and a list
of tentative refinement instructions and respective performance scores. These
scoresareobtainedbyrunningtheRAGwiththetentativerefinementinstruction
through a sample of training examples and evaluating the output against the
respective gold responses.
Focusing on the optimization phase, a meta-prompt is used that contains
both the description of the optimization problem and the history with previous
best solutions for the instruction. Such meta-prompt is iteratively entered into
the optimizer-LLM, and at each iteration that history is possibly updated with
generated instructions if these support better performance for the task at stake
inthegenerationphase.Theinstructionselectedoutofthisoptimizationprocess
is the best scoring one in the history obtained as this iteration is over.
An example of a meta-prompt is in Table 1, and a detailed description of
this optimization via iterative meta-prompting is presented in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 Optimization with meta-prompting
1: Input: Dataset D with n examples, each containing a query q, retrieved contents
c and the answer a; meta-prompt metaP with the description of the optimization
task and with a list of instructions and respective scores
2: Output: List of scored instructions and thebest scoring instruction
3: whileoptimizing prompt do
4: Entermeta-prompt to optimizer-LLM
5: Generate new instructions I
6: Select a random subset E of examples e from D
7: for each instruction I j do
8: for each example e in E do
k
9: Assemble prompt TransP from I j and contentsc k
10: EnterTransP to transformation-LLM
11: Generate transformed contentstc
12: Assemble prompt TaskP from queryq and tc
k
13: InputTaskP togeneration-LLM
14: Generate answer and evaluate it against gold a
k
15: endfor
16: Compute I jscore
17: endfor
18: Update metaP by replacing its worst scoring instruction by I j and I jscore if
thisis better scored
19: endwhile6 João Rodrigues and AntónioBranco
4 Dataset and models
To empirically assess the performance gains of the proposed method, it was
integrated into an RAG for question-answeringwhose performance provides for
its extrinsic evaluation.
4.1 Task and dataset
Multi-hop question answering requires taking into account disparate pieces of
content to get at the answer for a query, which constitutes a most demanding
scenario for the task of question answering.
We resortedtoa mostcomplexbenchmarkformulti-hopquestion-answering
available in the literature, the StrategyQA dataset [6,19,11,8], which contains
2,780 queries, each associated with related content made of paragraphs and the
respective yes or no answer. Based on Wikipedia content, this dataset covers
a range of diverse topics and the task consists in, given a query, to provide an
accurate answer to it together with the passages retrievedfrom Wikipedia with
the mostrelevantcontentto getat thatanswer —Table 2 displaysanexample.
Query Could$1foreach2009eclipsebuyacopyofTIMEmagazinein2020?
Content#1 Itsetouttotellthenewsthroughpeople,andformanydecadesthrough
thelate1960s,themagazine’scoverdepictedasingleperson.[...]Raymond
Fieldingalso noted that Larsen was "originally circulationmanager and
then general manager of Time, later publisher of Life, for many years
president of Time Inc., and in the long history of the corporation the
mostinfluentialandimportantfigureafterLuce"
Content#2 Total eclipses are rare because the timing of the new moon within the
eclipseseason needsto be more exact for an alignment between the ob-
server(on Earth)andthecentersoftheSunand Moon.[...]becauseto-
talityexistsonlyalonganarrowpathontheEarth’ssurfacetracedbythe
Moon’sfullshadoworumbra.
Content#3 Atleasttwolunareclipsesandasmanyasfiveoccureveryyear,although
totallunareclipsesaresignificantlylesscommon.Ifthedateandtimeof
aneclipseisknown,theoccurrencesofupcomingeclipsesarepredictable
usinganeclipsecycle,likethesaros.
Answer Yes
Table 2.StrategyQA-AnexamplefromtheStrategyQA,withaquery,threeofthe
most relevant pieces of content,and therespective answer.
To provide for the evaluation of the proposed method, and isolate the ac-
crued performance induced by it, thus disregarding possible fluctuation or loss
ofperformancedue to the retrievalprocess,onlythe goldpiecesof contentfrom
atestsetshouldbetakenintoaccount.Sincetheanswersarenotprovidedinthe
originaltestsetofStrategyQA,anewtestsetforthepresentevaluationexercise
had to be built. Accordingly,we divided the originaltraining setinto two parts:
anewtestsetwith490oftheoriginaltrainingexamples,whichmatchesthesize
oftheoriginaltestset,andanewtrainingsetcontainingasubsetwith1800such
examples. The resulting train and test sets have an average query length of 9.6
words, and 2.33 contents (paragraphs) per query and are almost balanced. The
training set contains 834 yes answers and 966 no answers (46.32 % / 53.68 %).
The test set contains 237 yes answers and 253 no answers (48.40 % / 51.60 %).Meta-prompting Optimized Retrieval-augmented Generation 7
4.2 Models
Two Transformer-basedlanguage models with 70 Billion parameters were used,
a pre-trained Llama-2-70b and an instruct model Llama-2-70b-chat fine-tuned
for dialogue use [31]. These models were trained and fine-tuned with a context
length of 4k tokens over 2 Trillion tokens on a mix of publicly available data.
In general, the default Llama2 model hyper-parameters were applied and
no hyper-parameters search bound was performed. All language models use a
temperature value of 1.0, a maximum of 64 generation tokens for the new in-
structions, a maximum of 128 generation tokens for the refined content, and a
maximumof64generationtokensfortheresponsetothetask.Theoptimization
run was performed for two days on two NVIDIA A100 40GB GPUs.
All software and versioning along with hyper-parameters are fully described
in the source code of these experiments.1
4.3 Evaluation procedure and metrics
Based on empirical experimentation, we arrived at a meta-prompt, presented
in Table 1, that indicates the aim of the optimization problem and includes a
starting example instruction.2
The instruction optimization was iterated over 100 steps. At each step, 3
instructions were generated, each such instruction was evaluated on a random
sample of 6 training examples,and the meta-promptwas eventually updated to
containing the 8 top scoring queries so far. When this iteration was concluded,
the best scoring instruction was retained as the optimized instruction.
We compareagainstthe samegeneration-LLMusing testqueriesandassoci-
atedpiecesofcontent,thatiswithoutthelaterbeingrefinedbythetransformation-
LLM under the instruction that was optimized by the optimizer-LLM.
FortheStrategyQAtask,aBooleananswerisexpected.Accuracyisthusthe
metric used for evaluating the match between the answer output by the system
and the gold answer in the data set. Accuracy score is given by the proportion
of correct answers, and a generated response was counted as correct if the gold
answerwasfoundinthe exactbeginning ofit.The responseunderwentminimal
normalization, with just lowercasing.
Asfortheinstrumentalprocessofinstructionoptimization,itisworthrecall-
ingthattheevaluationisperformedoversampleexamplesfromthetrainingset.
Foratentativelygeneratedinstruction,acorrectanswertoitcounted1point;an
incorrect answer, in turn, counted 0.5 points if it was nevertheless in a Boolean
format, or counted 0 points otherwise. The maximum possible score was thus 6
points,giveneachtentative instructionwas evaluatedagainst6 sampledqueries
as indicated above.
1 For the sake of reproducibility, data and code are available at
https://github.com/nlx-group/rag-meta-prompt
2 The starting instruction is "Clean and organize theprevioustext."8 João Rodrigues and AntónioBranco
5 Results and discussion
In this section, we report on the evaluation exercise undertaken to assess the
proposed method and discuss its results, summarized in Table 3
5.1 Experiments
Allinall,sixexperimentswereundertaken,tworesortingtothemodelLlama-2-
70b, developed with a pre-training regime only, and four resorting to the model
Llama-2-70b-chat,whichresultedfromfurtherfine-tuningitwithdialoguedata.
Model Method Accuracy
Llama-2-70b query 17 (3.46 %)
Llama-2-70b query+contents 33 (6.73 %)
Llama-2-70b-chat query 81 (16.53 %)
Llama-2-70b-chat query+contents(plain RAG) 128 (26.12 %)
Llama-2-70b-chat refinedquery+contents(ours) 170 (34.69 %)
Llama-2-70b-chat ref. query+contentsno iteration 127 (25.92 %)
Table 3. Evaluation - From the total 490 test set examples, the number of correct
answers is presented and the respectiveaccuracy.
Both these models were used in two evaluation scenarios. In one of these
scenarios—notedas query in Table 3—, the response to the query entered was
providedbythe LLMalone,withnofurthercontentfromexternalsourcesbeing
entered. In the other scenario, in turn,—noted as query+contents—, further
content from external sources was included in the prompt as well. The perfor-
mance scores for these two scenarios with the two models are displayed in the
top four rows 3.
External, non-parametric content improves generation As expected,
and in line with results in the literature, the retrieval-augmented generation
(26.12%) outperforms the plain generation based solely on the query (16.53%).
Fine-tuning improves generation Also as expected, and by a very large
margin, better performance scores were obtained with Llama-2-70b-chat,which
had been fine-tuned on dialogue tasks, namely 16.53% against 3.46%, with the
query only, and 26.12%against 6.73%, with the query and external content.
Retrievedcontentrefinementviameta-promptingoptimizationim-
provesRAG—theproposedmethodiseffectiveThemodelLlama-2-70b-
chat was thus retained and two further evaluation scenarios were considered.
A scenario with the application of the proposed method—noted as refined
query+contents—, wherethe externalcontentwasrefinedwiththe helpofan
instruction optimized with meta-prompting.
The performance scores indicate that, with 34.69% accuracy, our proposed
methodofenhancedRAGoutperformsplainRAG,with26.12%,thuscontribut-
ing for a large improvement of over 8.5 percentage points, that represents here
an improvement rate of almost 33%.Meta-prompting Optimized Retrieval-augmented Generation 9
Retrieved content refinement via "brute force" optimization does
not improve RAG A sixth scenario—notedas refined query+contents no
iter—was also considered. Here the external content was refined as in the pro-
posed method, but the instruction was refined under an alternative way that
dispensed with iterative meta-prompting.
All in all, 300 tentative instructions are generated during all optimization
steps —recall that we had 100 iteration steps with 3 tentative instructions gen-
erated per step with meta-prompting optimization. To dispense with this iter-
ative meta-prompting, the same number of 300 new tentative instructions were
generatedatonce,ina"bruteforce"fashion.Bythe endofthisprocess,allten-
tativeinstructionswerescoredwiththesamescoringfunctionasintheproposed
method, and the top instruction was evaluated on the test set.
This "brute force" optimization approach, scoring 25.92%, is outperformed
notonlybytheproposedmethodofmeta-promptingoptimization,with34.69%,
but even also by the baseline, plain RAG, with 26.12%.
StatisticalsignificanceToassessthestatisticalsignificanceoftheimprove-
mentsbyourmethod,weemployedtheunpairedt-test.3 Weevaluatedthebase-
linesystemwiththreeseedsanddidthesameforthemeta-promptingoptimized
system.Bothsamplesareindependentandonemayassumethesamplesarenor-
mally distributed. Applying the unpaired t-test, a two-tailed P value equal to
0.0004 was obtained, which is considered statistically significant.
5.2 Examining the tentative instructions
Table4presentsthetopgeneratedprompts.Thebestscoringprompt(lastrow),
with 5.5 (out of a maximum of 6), was obtained at iterationstep 46 (out of 300
stepsintotal),andagoodprompt(firstrow)canbeobtainedwithonly28steps.
Whenreadingthebestprompt(lastrow),onerealizesthatitaimstoimprove
the task through the summarization of the retrieved contents, considering their
broader context, and identifying the main theme or message. It appears thus
like a reasonable prompt a human might have thoughtfully arrived at if aiming
at improving the performance of the task.
Itisreasonabletoassumethatthemeta-promptiterationinsubsequentsteps
usedthis queryanditsscoreinitssearchforfurthertentativeinstructions,with
the generatedinstructions in three subsequent steps (58, 65 and72) being some
derivation of it (second, fourth and fifth rows).
When taking a look at the entire set of generatedqueries,a high fluctuation
of the evaluation scores can be observed along the iteration steps. This is likely
due to some interim, generated instructions happening to perform poorly.
5.3 Examining the responses
To gain insight about where our method outperformed the plain RAG baseline,
we examinedthe first10 instanceswhere our method correctlyprovidedthe an-
3 The unpaired t-test evaluates if there exists a statistically significant distinction
between themeans of two independent samples by comparing them.10 João Rodrigues and AntónioBranco
Generated instruction Score Iter. step
Summarizetheprevioustextin2-3sentences,whilealsoconsidering
thebroadercontext,theauthor’sintent,thepotentialimplicationsof
theinformation,andalsoidentifythemainthemeormessageandits 5 65
significance, and also analyze the impact of the information on the
reader.
Summarizetheprevioustextin1sentence,whilealsoconsideringthe
broadercontext,theauthor’sintent,thepotentialimplicationsofthe
information,andalsoidentifythemainthemeormessageanditssig- 5 72
nificance,andalsoanalyzetheimpactoftheinformationonthereader,
andalsoproviderecommendationsforfurther
Summarizetheprevioustextin2-3sentences,whilealsoconsidering
thebroadercontext,theauthor’sintentandthepotentialimplications 5.5 46
oftheinformation,andalsoidentifythemainthemeormessage.
Table 4. Top meta-prompting optimized instructions scoring 5 or higher, with
respective scores and iteration steps at which they were obtained, ordered top to bot-
tom, with thetop-scoring, retained instruction in thelast row.
swer while the baseline failed. Among these, in six cases, the baseline provided
a verbose response and might have failed the exact-match evaluation criterion
used.4 In the remaining four cases, the baseline either answered incorrectly, re-
sponded with a query, or failed to provide an answer.
Conversely, we reviewed the first 10 instances where our method failed to
provide the correct answer while the baseline succeeded. We observed that our
method exhibited a verbose response behavior in five cases that eventually ar-
rived at the correct answer but failed the exact-match evaluation criterion. In
two other cases, our method gave a verbose response without providing an an-
swer,whileintworemaindercases,itprovidedanincorrectresponse.Finally,in
one instance, our method did not provide any response.
Bothmethodsseemthustobesimilarlypenalizedbytheevaluationcriterion
for not providing straight answers when the correct answer may happen to be
included in the verbose response.
6 Future work
While providing a method that effectively enhances RAG, our proposal paves
thewayforfutureresearch,suchastheexplorationofoptimalhyper-parameters,
refining content retrieved without gold content, scaling up with larger models,
exploring further evaluation functions, or tackling other downstream tasks. A
significant number of hyper-parameters remain unexplored, which is an oppor-
tunity to further enhance the efficacy of this method.
It is worth noting that the evaluation with exact matching is a binary task,
and achieving an exact match with a task demanding a more complex string
match still needs to be studied, questioning the need for additional training, a
different meta-prompt, or a different approach.
4 Anexampleofaverboseresponse:[query]WasSuperherofictioninventedinthedigi-
talformat?[response]Theanswerisno;superherofictiondidnotoriginateindigital
format. Superheroes have their roots in pulp magazines, comic strips, and comic
books, which were all print media formats before theadventof digital technology.Meta-prompting Optimized Retrieval-augmented Generation 11
It will be interesting also to study the interaction of our proposed method
with the Portuguese language [20,2] with the existing family of LLMs [24,30,29]
and multi-modal LLMs [27] as also with other tasks such as argument mining
[25], exploring data spuriousness and others [4,28,3,23].
7 Conclusion
This paper introduces a novel method that enhances RAG and that can be
combinedwithpreviousapproachesforRAGenhancement.Itconsistsinrefining
the retrieved content included in the prompt entered into the generation model
with the help of a refinement instruction that was obtained by means of meta-
prompting optimization.
It reports also on the empirical assessment of this proposal by means of it
being embedded in a most demanding multi-hop question answering task. The
evaluationresultsindicatethatitishighlyeffectiveinasmuchasitoutperforms
RAG without this method by over 30%.
Acknowledgments. Thisresearchwaspartiallysupportedby:PORTULANCLARIN
—ResearchInfrastructurefortheScienceandTechnologyofLanguage,fundedbyLis-
boa 2020, Alentejo 2020 and FCT (PINFRA/22117/2016); ACCELERAT.AI - Multi-
lingual Intelligent Contact Centers, funded byIAPMEI (C625734525-00462629);
References
1. Aarohi Srivastava, A.R., et al.: Quantifying and extrapolating the capabilities of
language models. Transactions on Machine Learning Research (2023)
2. Branco, A., Mendes, A., Quaresma, P., Gomes, L., Silva, J., Teixeira, A.: Infras-
tructure for the science and technology of language PORTULAN CLARIN. In:
Rehm,G.,Bontcheva,K.,Choukri,K.,Hajič,J.,Piperidis, S.,Vasiljevs,A.(eds.)
,
Proceedingsofthe1stInternationalWorkshoponLanguageTechnologyPlatforms.
pp.1–7.EuropeanLanguageResourcesAssociation,Marseille,France(May2020),
https://aclanthology.org/2020.iwltp-1.1
3. Branco,A.,Rodrigues,J.,Salawa,M.,Branco,R.,Saedi,C.:Comparativeprobing
oflexicalsemanticstheoriesforcognitiveplausibility andtechnological usefulness.
In:Proceedingsofthe28thInternationalConferenceonComputationalLinguistics.
pp.4004–4019 (2020)
4. Branco, R., Branco, A., António Rodrigues, J., Silva, J.R.: Shortcutted common-
sense: Data spuriousness in deep learning of commonsense reasoning. In: Moens,
M.F., Huang, X., Specia, L., Yih, S.W.t. (eds.) Proceedings of the 2021 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing. pp. 1504–1521.
Association for Computational Linguistics, Online and Punta Cana, Domini-
canRepublic(Nov2021).https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2021.emnlp-main.113,
https://aclanthology.org/2021.emnlp-main.113
5. Chen,Y.,Arkin,J.,Hao,Y.,Zhang,Y.,Roy,N.,Fan,C.:Promptoptimization in
multi-step tasks (promst): Integrating human feedback and preference alignment.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.08702 (2024)12 João Rodrigues and AntónioBranco
6. Geva, M., Khashabi, D., Segal, E., Khot, T., Roth, D., Berant, J.: Did aristotle
use a laptop? a question answering benchmark with implicit reasoning strategies.
Transactions of theAssociation for Computational Linguistics 9, 346–361 (2021)
7. Guo,Q.,Wang,R.,Guo,J.,Li,B.,Song,K.,Tan,X.,Liu,G.,Bian,J.,Yang,Y.:
Connecting large language models with evolutionary algorithms yields powerful
prompt optimizers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.08532 (2023)
8. Ho,X.,DuongNguyen,A.K.,Sugawara,S.,Aizawa,A.:Constructingamulti-hop
QA dataset for comprehensive evaluation of reasoning steps. In: Proceedings of
the 28th International Conference on Computational Linguistics. pp. 6609–6625.
International Committee on Computational Linguistics (Dec2020)
9. Houlsby, N., Giurgiu, A., Jastrzebski, S., Morrone, B., De Laroussilhe, Q., Ges-
mundo, A., Attariyan, M., Gelly, S.: Parameter-efficient transfer learning for nlp.
In:International conference on machine learning. pp. 2790–2799. PMLR (2019)
10. Howard,J.,Ruder,S.:Universallanguagemodelfine-tuningfortextclassification.
In:Proceedings ofthe56thAnnualMeetingof theAssociation for Computational
Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers). pp. 328–339 (2018)
11. Inoue, N., Stenetorp, P., Inui, K.: R4C: A benchmark for evaluating RC systems
to get the right answer for the right reason. In: Proceedings of the 58th Annual
MeetingoftheAssociationforComputationalLinguistics.pp.6740–6750(Jul2020)
12. Ji,Z.,Lee,N.,Frieske,R.,Yu,T.,Su,D.,Xu,Y.,Ishii,E.,Bang,Y.J.,Madotto,A.,
Fung,P.:Surveyofhallucinationinnaturallanguagegeneration.ACMComputing
Surveys55(12), 1–38 (2023)
13. Kong, W., Amba Hombaiah, S., Zhang, M., Mei, Q., Bendersky, M.: Prewrite:
Prompt rewriting with reinforcement learning. arXiv e-prints pp. arXiv–2401
(2024)
14. Lester, B., Al-Rfou, R., Constant, N.: The power of scale for parameter-efficient
prompt tuning. In: Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in
NaturalLanguage Processing. pp.3045–3059 (2021)
15. Lewis,P.,Perez,E.,Piktus,A.,Petroni,F.,Karpukhin,V.,Goyal,N.,Küttler,H.,
Lewis, M., Yih, W.t., Rocktäschel, T., et al.: Retrieval-augmented generation for
knowledge-intensivenlptasks.AdvancesinNeuralInformationProcessingSystems
33, 9459–9474 (2020)
16. Li, X.L., Liang, P.: Prefix-tuning: Optimizing continuous prompts for generation.
In:Proceedings ofthe59thAnnualMeetingof theAssociation for Computational
Linguistics. pp.4582–4597 (2021)
17. Lin, S., Hilton, J., Evans, O.: Truthfulqa: Measuring how models mimic human
falsehoods. In: Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics. pp.3214–3252 (2022)
18. Liu,P.,Yuan,W.,Fu,J.,Jiang,Z.,Hayashi,H.,Neubig,G.:Pre-train,prompt,and
predict:Asystematicsurveyofpromptingmethodsinnaturallanguageprocessing.
ACMComputing Surveys55(9), 1–35 (2023)
19. Min,S.,Wallace,E.,Singh,S.,Gardner,M.,Hajishirzi,H.,Zettlemoyer,L.:Com-
positionalquestionsdonotnecessitatemulti-hopreasoning.In:Proceedingsofthe
57th AnnualMeeting of theAssociation for Computational Linguistics (Jul 2019)
20. Osório, T.F., Leite, B., Lopes Cardoso, H., Gomes, L., Rodrigues, J., Santos, R.,
Branco,A.:PORTULANExtraGLUEdatasetsandmodels:Kick-startingabench-
mark for the neural processing of Portuguese. In: Zweigenbaum, P., Rapp, R.,
Sharoff, S. (eds.) Proceedings of the 17th Workshop on Building and Using Com-
parable Corpora (BUCC) @ LREC-COLING 2024. pp. 24–34. ELRA and ICCL,
Torino, Italia (May 2024), https://aclanthology.org/2024.bucc-1.3Meta-prompting Optimized Retrieval-augmented Generation 13
21. Prasad, A., Hase, P., Zhou, X., Bansal, M.: Grips: Gradient-free, edit-based in-
struction search for promptinglarge language models. In:Proceedings ofthe17th
Conference of theEACL. pp.3845–3864 (2023)
22. Raffel,C.,Shazeer:Exploringthelimitsoftransferlearningwithaunifiedtext-to-
text transformer. Machine Learning Research 21, 5485–5551 (2020)
23. Rodrigues,J.,Branco,R.,Silva,J.,Saedi,C.,Branco,A.:Predictingbrainactiva-
tionwithwordnetembeddings.In:ProceedingsoftheEightWorkshoponCognitive
Aspectsof Computational Language Learning and Processing. pp.1–5 (2018)
24. Rodrigues,J., Gomes, L.,Silva,J., Branco, A.,Santos, R.,Cardoso, H.L.,Osório,
T.: Advancing neural encoding of portuguese with transformer albertina pt. In:
EPIA Conference on Artificial Intelligence. pp.441–453. Springer (2023)
25. Rodrigues, J.A., Branco, A.: Transferring confluent knowledge to argument min-
ing. In: Calzolari, N., Huang, C.R., Kim, H., Pustejovsky, J., Wanner, L., Choi,
K.S.,Ryu,P.M.,Chen,H.H.,Donatelli, L.,Ji,H.,Kurohashi,S.,Paggio, P.,Xue,
N., Kim, S., Hahm, Y., He, Z., Lee, T.K., Santus, E., Bond, F., Na, S.H. (eds.)
Proceedings of the 29th International Conference on Computational Linguistics.
pp.6859–6874. InternationalCommitteeonComputationalLinguistics,Gyeongju,
Republicof Korea (Oct 2022), https://aclanthology.org/2022.coling-1.597
26. Sabbatella, A., Ponti, A., Giordani, I., Candelieri, A., Archetti, F.: Prompt opti-
mization in large language models. Mathematics 12(6) (2024)
27. Santos, R., Branco, A., Silva, J.R.: Cost-effective language driven image editing
with LX-DRIM. In: Proceedings of the First Workshop on Performance and In-
terpretabilityEvaluationsofMultimodal,Multipurpose,Massive-ScaleModels.pp.
31–43.InternationalConferenceonComputationalLinguistics,Virtual(Oct2022),
https://aclanthology.org/2022.mmmpie-1.5
28. Santos, R., Rodrigues, J., Branco, A., Vaz, R.: Neural text categorization with
transformersforlearningportugueseasasecondlanguage.In:ProgressinArtificial
Intelligence: 20th EPIA Conference on Artificial Intelligence, EPIA 2021, Virtual
Event,September7–9, 2021, Proceedings 20. pp.715–726. Springer(2021)
29. Santos, R., Rodrigues, J., Gomes, L., Silva, J.R., Branco, A., Lopes Cardoso,
H., Osório, T.F., Leite, B.: Fostering the ecosystem of open neural encoders for
Portuguese with albertina PT* family. In: Melero, M., Sakti, S., Soria, C. (eds.)
Proceedings of the 3rd Annual Meeting of the Special Interest Group on Under-
resourced Languages @ LREC-COLING 2024. pp. 105–114. ELRA and ICCL,
Torino, Italia (May 2024), https://aclanthology.org/2024.sigul-1.14
30. Santos,R.,Silva,J.R.,Gomes,L.,Rodrigues,J.,Branco,A.:Advancinggenerative
AIforPortuguesewithopendecodergervásioPT*.In:Melero,M.,Sakti,S.,Soria,
C. (eds.) Proceedings of the3rd AnnualMeeting oftheSpecial Interest Group on
Under-resourcedLanguages@LREC-COLING2024.pp.16–26.ELRAandICCL,
Torino, Italia (May 2024), https://aclanthology.org/2024.sigul-1.3
31. Touvron,H.,Martin,L.,Stone,K.,etal.:Llama2:Openfoundationandfine-tuned
chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288 (2023)
32. Vaswani,A.,Shazeer,N.,Parmar,N.,Uszkoreit,J.,Jones,L.,Gomez,A.N.,Kaiser,
Ł., Polosukhin, I.: Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information pro-
cessing systems 30 (2017)
33. Wang,X.,Li, C., Wang,Z.,Bai, F., Luo,H., Zhang,J., Jojic, N.,Xing,E.P., Hu,
Z.: Promptagent: Strategic planning with language models enables expert-level
prompt optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.16427 (2023)
34. Wei,J.,Wang,X.,Schuurmans,D.,etal.:Chain-of-thoughtpromptingelicitsrea-
soning in large language models. Advancesin NIPS 35 (2022)14 João Rodrigues and AntónioBranco
35. Yang,C.,Wang,X.,Lu,Y.,Liu,H.,Le,Q.V.,Zhou,D.,Chen,X.:Largelanguage
models as optimizers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.03409 (2023)
36. Yao,S.,Yu,D.,Zhao,J.,etal.:Treeofthoughts:Deliberateproblemsolvingwith
large language models. Advancesin NIPS 36 (2024)
37. Zhong,Z.,Friedman,D.,Chen,D.:Factualprobingis[mask]:Learningvs.learning
torecall. In:Proceedings of the2021 Conference of the NACL(2021)