Training Classifiers with Natural Language Explanations
BradenHancock ParomaVarma StephanieWang
ComputerScienceDept. ElectricalEngineeringDept. ComputerScienceDept.
StanfordUniversity StanfordUniversity StanfordUniversity
bradenjh@cs.stanford.edu paroma@stanford.edu steph17@stanford.edu
MartinBringmann PercyLiang ChristopherRe´
OccamzRazor ComputerScienceDept. ComputerScienceDept.
SanFrancisco,CA StanfordUniversity StanfordUniversity
martin@occamzrazor.com pliang@cs.stanford.edu chrismre@cs.stanford.edu
Abstract
Example
Both cohorts showed signs of optic nerve toxicitydue
Trainingaccurateclassifiersrequiresmany
to ethambutol.
labels, but each label provides only
limited information (one bit for binary Label
classification). In this work, we propose Does this chemicalcause this disease?
BabbleLabble, a framework for training Y N
classifiers in which an annotator provides
Explanation
a natural language explanation for each
Why do you think so?
labeling decision. A semantic parser
Because the words “due to” occur between the
converts these explanations into program- chemical and the disease.
matic labeling functions that generate
noisy labels for an arbitrary amount of Labeling Function
def lf(x):
unlabeled data, which is used to train a return(1 if “due to” in between(x.chemical, x.disease)
else 0)
classifier. On three relation extraction
tasks, we find that users are able to Figure 1: In BabbleLabble, the user provides
trainclassifierswithcomparableF1scores a natural language explanation for each label-
from5–100×fasterbyprovidingexplana- ing decision. These explanations are parsed into
tions instead of just labels. Furthermore, labelingfunctionsthatconvertunlabeleddatainto
giventheinherentimperfectionoflabeling alargelabeleddatasetfortrainingaclassifier.
functions,wefindthatasimplerule-based
semanticparsersuffices.
text(ZaidanandEisner,2008; AroraandNyberg,
2009),ormarkingrelevantregionsinimages(Ahn
1 Introduction
et al., 2006). But there are certain types of infor-
The standard protocol for obtaining a labeled mationwhichcannotbeeasilyreducedtoannotat-
dataset is to have a human annotator view each ingaportionoftheinput,suchastheabsenceofa
example, assess its relevance, and provide a label certainword,orthepresenceofatleasttwowords.
(e.g.,positiveornegativeforbinaryclassification). Inthiswork,wetapintothepowerofnaturallan-
However,thisonlyprovidesonebitofinformation guageandallowannotatorstoprovidesupervision
per example. This invites the question: how can
toaclassifiervianaturallanguageexplanations.
we get more information per example, given that Specifically, we propose a framework in which
the annotator has already spent the effort reading annotatorsprovideanaturallanguageexplanation
andunderstandinganexample? for each label they assign to an example (see Fig-
Previous works have relied on identifying rel- ure 1). These explanations are parsed into log-
evant parts of the input such as labeling features ical forms representing labeling functions (LFs),
(Druck et al., 2009; Raghavan et al., 2005; Liang functionsthatheuristicallymapexamplestolabels
et al., 2009), highlighting rationale phrases in (Ratner et al., 2016). The labeling functions are
8102
guA
52
]LC.sc[
4v81830.5081:viXraUnlabeled Examples + Explanations Labeling Functions Filters Label Matrix
Label whether person 1 is married to person 2 def LF_1a(x): x x x x …
return (1 if “his wife” in Correct 1 2 3 4
x1Tom Bradyand his wife Gisele Bündchenwere left(x.person2, dist==1) else 0)
LF 1
spotted in New York City on Monday amid rumors def LF_1b(x): Semantic 1a
of Brady’s alleged role in Deflategate. return (1 if “his wife” in Filter LF -1
right(x.person2) else 0 (inconsistent) 2b
True, because the words “his wife”
are right before person 2. def LF_2a(x): LF 3a -1 -1
return (-1 if x.person1 in Pragmatic x2None of us knows what happened at Kane‘s x x. .s se en nt te en nc ce
e
a en ld sex. 0p )erson2 in (alwF ai yl st e tr
rue)
LF 4c
home Aug. 2, but it is telling that the NHLhas not
suspended Kane. def LF_2b(x):
return (-1 if x.person1 == Correct ỹ
False, because person 1and person 2 x.person2) else 0)
in the sentence are identical.
def LF_3a(x):
x3D inr s. uM rai nch cea e bl
u
R si ic nh ea sr sd ms aa nn d
G
r ae ra
y
l
K
e irs kt ea t e
d
ia dn nd
o t attend
ret xu .r pn er( s- o1 n1i .f
tokens[-1] != Correct
the event. x.person2.tokens[-1] else 0)
False, because the last word of def LF_3b(x): Pragmatic person 1 is different than the last return (-1 if not ( Filter
word of person 2. x x. .p pe er rs so on n1 2. .t to ok ke en ns s[ [- -1 1] ] )== e lse 0) (d ou fp l Li Fc _a 3t ae )
…
1 1 1
+ - - + …
Noisy Labels Classifier
(x ,ỹ )
1 1
(x ,ỹ )
2 2 x ỹ (x ,ỹ) 3 3
(x ,ỹ) 4 4
Figure 2: Natural language explanations are parsed into candidate labeling functions (LFs). Many
incorrectLFsarefilteredoutautomaticallybythefilterbank. Theremainingfunctionsprovideheuristic
labelsovertheunlabeleddataset,whichareaggregatedintoonenoisylabelperexample,yieldingalarge,
noisily-labeledtrainingsetforaclassifier.
then executed on many unlabeled examples, re- simplerule-basedparser. InSection4,wefindthat
sulting in a large, weakly-supervised training set inourweaksupervisionframework,therule-based
thatisthenusedtotrainaclassifier. semanticparserandtheperfectparseryieldnearly
identicaldownstreamperformance. Second,while
Semantic parsing of natural language into log-
they use the logical forms of explanations to pro-
ical forms is recognized as a challenging prob-
ducefeaturesthatarefeddirectlytoaclassifier,we
lem and has been studied extensively (Zelle and
use them as functions for labeling a much larger
Mooney, 1996; Zettlemoyer and Collins, 2005;
trainingset. InSection4,weshowthatusingfunc-
Liang et al., 2011; Liang, 2016). One of our ma-
tions yields a 9.5 F1 improvement (26% relative
jor findings is that in our setting, even a simple
improvement)overfeatures,andthattheF1score
rule-based semantic parser suffices for three rea-
scaleswiththeamountofavailableunlabeleddata.
sons: First, we find that the majority of incorrect
We validate our approach on two existing
LFscanbeautomaticallyfilteredouteitherseman-
datasets from the literature (extracting spouses
tically(e.g.,isitconsistentwiththeassociatedex-
from news articles and disease-causing chemi-
ample?) or pragmatically (e.g., does it avoid as-
cals from biomedical abstracts) and one real-
signing the same label to the entire training set?).
world use case with our biomedical collabora-
Second,LFsnearthegoldLFinthespaceoflogi-
tors at OccamzRazor to extract protein-kinase
calformsareoftenjustasaccurate(andsometimes
interactions related to Parkinson’s disease from
even more accurate). Third, techniques for com-
text. We find empirically that users are able to
biningweaksupervisionsourcesarebuilttotoler-
train classifiers with comparable F1 scores up to
atesomenoise(Alfonsecaetal.,2012;Takamatsu
100× faster when they provide natural language
etal.,2012;Ratneretal.,2018). Thesignificance
explanations instead of individual labels. Our
of this is that we can deploy the same semantic
code is available at https://github.com/
parser across tasks without task-specific training.
HazyResearch/babble.
Weshowhowwecantackleareal-worldbiomedi-
calapplicationwiththesamesemanticparserused
2 TheBabbleLabbleFramework
toextractinstancesofspouses.
Our work is most similar to that of Srivastava The BabbleLabble framework converts natural
etal.(2017),whoalsousenaturallanguageexpla- language explanations and unlabeled data into a
nationstotrainaclassifier,butwithtwoimportant noisily-labeled training set (see Figure 2). There
differences. First,theyjointlytrainatask-specific are three key components: a semantic parser, a
semantic parser and classifier, whereas we use a filter bank, and a label aggregator. The semanticLF
CONDITION
BOOL ARGLIST ISEQUAL
START LABEL FALSE BECAUSE ARG AND ARG IS EQUAL STOP
<START> label false because X and Y are the same person <STOP>
Lexical Rules Unary Rules Compositional Rules Ignored token
START→ <START> BOOL→ FALSE LF → START LABEL BOOL BECAUSE CONDITION STOP
LABEL → label BOOL→ TRUE CONDITION → ARGLIST ISEQUAL
FALSE → false NUM → INT ARGLIST → ARG AND ARG
Figure 3: Valid parses are found by iterating over increasingly large subspans of the input looking for
matches among the right hand sides of the rules in the grammar. Rules are either lexical (converting
tokensintosymbols),unary(convertingonesymbolintoanothersymbol),orcompositional(combining
manysymbolsintoasinglehigher-ordersymbol). Arulemayoptionallyignoreunrecognizedtokensin
aspan(denotedherewithadashedline).
parserconvertsnaturallanguageexplanationsinto We choose a simple rule-based semantic parser
a set of logical forms representing labeling func- that can be used without any training. Formally,
tions (LFs). The filter bank removes as many in- the parser uses a set of rules of the form α → β,
correct LFs as possible without requiring ground whereαcanbereplacedbythetoken(s)inβ (see
truthlabels. TheremainingLFsareappliedtoun- Figure3forexamplerules). Toidentifycandidate
labeled examples to produce a matrix of labels. LFs,werecursivelyconstructasetofvalidparses
This label matrix is passed into the label aggre- foreachspanoftheexplanation,basedonthesub-
gator, which combines these potentially conflict- stitutions defined by the grammar rules. At the
ing and overlapping labels into one label for each end,theparserreturnsallvalidparses(LFsinour
example. Theresultinglabeledexamplesarethen case)correspondingtotheentireexplanation.
usedtotrainanarbitrarydiscriminativemodel. We also allow an arbitrary number of tokens in
a given span to be ignored when looking for a
2.1 Explanations
matching rule. This improves the ability of the
To create the input explanations, the user views a parser to handle unexpected input, such as un-
subset S of an unlabeled dataset D (where |S| (cid:28) known words or typos, since the portions of the
|D|) and provides for each input x ∈ S a label input that are parseable can still result in a valid
i
y and a natural language explanation e , a sen- parse. For example, in Figure 3, the word “per-
i i
tence explaining why the example should receive son”isignored.
that label. The explanation e i generally refers to All predicates included in our grammar (sum-
specific aspects of the example (e.g., in Figure 2, marized in Table 1) are provided to annota-
thelocationofaspecificstring“hiswife”). tors, with minimal examples of each in use
(AppendixA). Importantly, all rules are do-
2.2 SemanticParser
main independent (e.g., all three relation extrac-
The semantic parser takes a natural language ex- tiontasksthatwetestedusedthesamegrammar),
planatione andreturnsasetofLFs(logicalforms makingthesemanticparsereasilytransferrableto
i
or labeling functions) {f ,...,f } of the form new domains. Additionally, while this paper fo-
1 k
f : X → {−1,0,1} in a binary classification cuses on the task of relation extraction, in princi-
i
setting, with 0 representing abstention. We em- pletheBabbleLabbleframeworkcanbeapplied
phasizethatthegoalofthissemanticparserisnot toothertasksorsettingsbyextendingthegrammar
to generate the single correct parse, but rather to with the necessary primitives (e.g., adding primi-
havecoverageovermanypotentiallyusefulLFs.1 tivesforrowsandcolumnstoenableexplanations
aboutthealignmentsofwordsintables). Toguide
1Indeed,wefindempiricallythatanincorrectLFnearby
theconstructionofthegrammar,wecollected500
the correct one in the space of logical forms actually has
higherend-taskaccuracy57%ofthetime(seeSection4.2). explanationsfortheSpousedomainfromworkersright.” The latter interpretation results in a func-
Predicate Description
tionthatisinconsistentwiththeassociatedexam-
bool, string, Standardprimitivedatatypes
ple(since“hiswife”isactuallytotheleftofperson
int, float, tuple,
list, set 2),soitcanbesafelyremoved.
and, or, not, any, Standardlogicoperators ThepragmaticfiltersremovesLFsthatarecon-
all, none
stant, redundant, or correlated. For example, in
=,(cid:54)=,<,≤,>,≥ Standardcomparisonoperators
Figure 2, LF 2a is constant, as it labels every ex-
lower, upper, Return True for strings of the
ample positively (since all examples contain two
capital, all caps correspondingcase
people from the same sentence). LF 3b is redun-
starts with, Return True if the first string
ends with, starts/endswithorcontainsthe dant, since even though it has a different syntax
substring second tree from LF 3a, it labels the training set identi-
person, location, Return True if a string has the callyandthereforeprovidesnonewsignal.
date, number, correspondingNERtag
Finally, out of all LFs from the same explana-
organization
alias Afrequentlyusedlistofwords tion that pass all the other filters, we keep only
maybepredefinedandreferred the most specific (lowest coverage) LF. This pre-
towithanalias
ventsmultiplecorrelatedLFsfromasingleexam-
count, contains, Operators for checking size,
plefromdominating.
intersection membership, or common ele-
mentsofalist/set As we show in Section 4, over three tasks, the
map, filter Applyafunctionalprimitiveto filter bank removes over 95% of incorrect parses,
each member of list/set to
and the incorrect ones that remain have average
transformorfiltertheelements
end-task accuracy within 2.5 points of the corre-
word distance, Return the distance between
character distance twostringsbywordsorcharac- spondingcorrectparses.
ters
left, right, Returnasastringthetextthatis 2.4 LabelAggregator
between, within left/right/within some distance
The label aggregator combines multiple (poten-
ofastringorbetweentwodes-
ignatedstrings tially conflicting) suggested labels from the LFs
and combines them into a single probabilistic la-
Table 1: Predicates in the grammar supported by
bel per example. Concretely, if m LFs pass
BabbleLabble’srule-basedsemanticparser.
the filter bank and are applied to n examples,
the label aggregator implements a function f :
{−1,0,1}m×n → [0,1]n.
on Amazon Mechanical Turk and added support
A naive solution would be to use a simple ma-
for the most commonly used predicates. These
jority vote, but this fails to account for the fact
were added before the experiments described in
that LFs can vary widely in accuracy and cover-
Section 4. The grammar contains a total of 200
age. Instead, we use data programming (Ratner
ruletemplates.
et al., 2016), which models the relationship be-
2.3 FilterBank tween the true labels and the output of the label-
ingfunctionsasafactorgraph. Morespecifically,
The input to the filter bank is a set of candidate giventhetruelabelsY ∈ {−1,1}n(latent)andla-
LFs produced by the semantic parser. The pur- bel matrix Λ ∈ {−1,0,1}m×n (observed) where
poseofthefilterbankistodiscardasmanyincor-
Λ = LF (x ), we define two types of factors
i,j i j
rect LFs as possible without requiring additional
representinglabelingpropensityandaccuracy:
labels. Itconsistsoftwoclassesoffilters: seman-
ticandpragmatic. φLab(Λ,Y) = 1{Λ (cid:54)= 0} (1)
i,j i,j
Recall that each explanation e is collected in
i φAcc(Λ,Y) = 1{Λ = y }. (2)
the context of a specific labeled example (x ,y ). i,j i,j j
i i
The semantic filter checks for LFs that are in-
Denotingthevectoroffactorspertainingtoagiven
consistent with their corresponding example; for- datapointx asφ (Λ,Y) ∈ Rm,definethemodel:
j j
mally,anyLFf forwhichf(x ) (cid:54)= y isdiscarded.
i i
For example, in the first explanation in Figure 2, n
(cid:16)(cid:88) (cid:17)
the word “right” can be interpreted as either “im- p w(Λ,Y) = Z w−1exp w·φ j(Λ,Y) , (3)
mediately”(asin“rightbefore”)orsimply“tothe j=1Spouse Example They include Joan Ridsdale, a 62-year-old payroll administrator from County Durham who was hit with a €16,000 tax bill when her
husband Gordondied.
(person 1,
person 2) Explanation True, because the phrase “her husband” is within three words of person 2.
Disease Example Young women on replacement estrogens for ovarian failure after cancer therapy may also have increased risk of endometrial
carcinomaand should be examined periodically.
(chemical,
disease) Explanation True, because “risk of” comes before the disease.
Protein Example Here we show that c-Jun N-terminal kinases JNK1, JNK2 and JNK3 phosphorylate tauat many serine/threonine-prolines, as
assessed by the generation of the epitopes of phosphorylation-dependent anti-tau antibodies.
(protein,
kinase) Explanation True, because at least one of the words 'phosphorylation', 'phosphorylate', 'phosphorylated', 'phosphorylates' is found in the
sentence and the number of words between the protein and kinase is smaller than 8."
Figure4: Anexampleandexplanationforeachofthethreedatasets.
where w ∈ R2m is the weight vector and Z w is Task Train Dev Test %Pos.
the normalization constant. To learn this model
Spouse 22195 2796 2697 8%
without knowing the true labels Y, we minimize
Disease 6667 773 4101 23%
thenegativelogmarginallikelihoodgiventheob-
Protein 5546 1011 1058 22%
servedlabelsΛ:
(cid:88) Table 2: The total number of unlabeled train-
wˆ = argmin−log p (Λ,Y) (4)
w ing examples (a pair of annotated entities in a
w
Y
sentence), labeleddevelopment examples(for hy-
usingSGDandGibbssamplingforinference,and perparameter tuning), labeled test examples (for
then usethe marginalsp wˆ(Y | Λ)as probabilistic assessment), and the fraction of positive labels in
traininglabels. thetestsplit.
Intuitively,weinferaccuraciesoftheLFsbased
on the way they overlap and conflict with one an-
classifierwithgenericfeaturesdefinedoverdepen-
other. Since noisier LFs are more likely to have
dency paths.3 These features include unigrams,
high conflict rates with others, their correspond-
bigrams, and trigrams of lemmas, dependency la-
ing accuracy weights in w will be smaller, reduc-
bels,andpartofspeechtagsfoundinthesiblings,
ingtheirinfluenceontheaggregatedlabels.
parents, and nodes between the entities in the de-
2.5 DiscriminativeModel pendency parse of the sentence. We found this to
performbetteronaveragethanabiLSTM,particu-
The noisy training set that the label aggregator
larlyforthetraditionalsupervisionbaselineswith
outputsisusedtotrainanarbitrarydiscriminative
small training set sizes; it also provided easily in-
model. Oneadvantageoftrainingadiscriminative
terpretablefeaturesforanalysis.
model on the task instead of using the label ag-
gregatorasaclassifierdirectlyisthatthelabelag-
3 ExperimentalSetup
gregator only takes into account those signals in-
cludedintheLFs. Adiscriminativemodel,onthe We evaluate the accuracy of BabbleLabble on
other hand, can incorporate features that were not three relation extraction tasks, which we refer to
identifiedbytheuserbutareneverthelessinforma- as Spouse, Disease, and Protein. The goal
tive.2 Consequently, even examples for which all of each task is to train a classifier for predicting
LFsabstainedcanstillbeclassifiedcorrectly. Ad- whether the two entities in an example are partic-
ditionally, passing supervision information from ipatingintherelationshipofinterest,asdescribed
the user to the model in the form of a dataset— below.
ratherthanhardrules—promotesgeneralizationin
3.1 Datasets
thenewmodel(ratherthanmemorization),similar
todistantsupervision(Mintzetal.,2009). Onthe Statistics for each dataset are reported in Ta-
three tasks we evaluate, using the discriminative ble 2, with one example and one explanation for
modelaverages4.3F1pointshigherthanusingthe eachgiveninFigure4andadditionalexplanations
labelaggregatordirectly. showninAppendixB.
For the results reported in this paper, our dis- In the Spouse task, annotators were shown a
criminative model is a simple logistic regression sentencewithtwohighlightednamesandaskedto
2WegiveanexampleoftwosuchfeaturesinSection4.3. 3https://github.com/HazyResearch/treedlibBL TS
#Inputs 30 30 60 150 300 1,000 3,000 10,000
Spouse 50.1 15.5 15.9 16.4 17.2 22.8 41.8 55.0
Disease 42.3 32.1 32.6 34.4 37.5 41.9 44.5 -
Protein 47.3 39.3 42.1 46.8 51.0 57.6 - -
Average 46.6 28.9 30.2 32.5 35.2 40.8 43.2 55.0
Table 3: F1 scores obtained by a classifier trained with BabbleLabble (BL) using 30 explanations
or with traditional supervision (TS) using the specified number of individually labeled examples.
BabbleLabble achieves the same F1 score as traditional supervision while using fewer user inputs
byafactorofover5(Protein)toover100(Spouse).
label whether the sentence suggests that the two 3.2 ExperimentalSettings
people are spouses. Sentences were pulled from
Text documents are tokenized with spaCy.4 The
theSignalMediadatasetofnewsarticles(Corney
semanticparserisbuiltontopofthePython-based
etal.,2016). Groundtruthdatawascollectedfrom
implementation SippyCup.5 On a single core,
Amazon Mechanical Turk workers, accepting the
parsing360explanationstakesapproximatelytwo
majority label over three annotations. The 30 ex-
seconds. We use existing implementations of the
planations we report on were sampled randomly
label aggregator, feature library, and discrimina-
fromapoolof200thatweregeneratedby10grad-
tive classifier described in Sections 2.4–2.5 pro-
uatestudentsunfamiliarwithBabbleLabble.
vided by the open-source project Snorkel (Ratner
etal.,2018).
In the Disease task, annotators were shown a Hyperparameters for all methods we report
sentencewithhighlightednamesofachemicaland were selected via random search over thirty con-
a disease and asked to label whether the sentence figurationsonthesameheld-outdevelopmentset.
suggeststhatthechemicalcausesthedisease. Sen- Wesearchedoverlearningrate,batchsize,L 2reg-
tences and ground truth labels came from a por- ularization,andthesubsamplingrate(forimprov-
tion of the 2015 BioCreative chemical-disease re- ing balance between classes).6 All reported F1
lation dataset (Wei et al., 2015), which contains scores are the average value of 40 runs with ran-
abstracts from PubMed. Because this task re- domseedsandotherwiseidenticalsettings.
quires specialized domain expertise, we obtained
4 ExperimentalResults
explanations by having someone unfamiliar with
BabbleLabble translate from Python to natural
We evaluate the performance of BabbleLabble
languagelabelingfunctionsfromanexistingpub-
withrespecttoitsrateofimprovementbynumber
lication that explored applying weak supervision
of user inputs, its dependence on correctly parsed
tothistask(Ratneretal.,2018).
logicalforms,andthemechanismbywhichituti-
lizeslogicalforms.
The Protein task was completed in conjunc-
tion with OccamzRazor, a neuroscience company 4.1 HighBandwidthSupervision
targeting biological pathways of Parkinson’s dis- In Table 3 we report the average F1 score of a
ease. For this task, annotators were shown a sen- classifiertrainedwithBabbleLabbleusing30ex-
tence from the relevant biomedical literature with planationsortraditionalsupervisionwiththeindi-
highlighted names of a protein and a kinase and cated number of labels. On average, it took the
asked to label whether or not the kinase influ- same amount of time to collect 30 explanations
ences the protein in terms of a physical interac-
tion or phosphorylation. The annotators had do- 4https://github.com/explosion/spaCy
main expertise but minimal programming experi-
5https://github.com/wcmac/sippycup
6Hyperparameter ranges: learning rate (1e-2 to 1e-4),
ence,makingBabbleLabbleanaturalfitfortheir
batchsize(32to128),L regularization(0to100),subsam-
2
usecase. plingrate(0to0.5)Pre-filters Discarded Post-filters BL-FB BL BL+PP
LFs Correct Sem. Prag. LFs Correct Spouse 15.7 50.1 49.8
Disease 39.8 42.3 43.2
Spouse 156 10% 19 118 19 84%
Protein 38.2 47.3 47.4
Disease 102 23% 34 40 28 89%
Protein 122 14% 44 58 20 85% Average 31.2 46.6 46.8
Table 4: The number of LFs generated from 30 Table5: F1scoresobtainedusingBabbleLabble
explanations (pre-filters), discarded by the filter with no filter bank (BL-FB), as normal (BL), and
bank, and remaining (post-filters), along with the withaperfectparser(BL+PP)simulatedbyhand.
percentageofLFsthatwerecorrectlyparsedfrom
theircorrespondingexplanations.
erage. Furthermore, among those LFs that pass
through the filter bank, we found that the aver-
as 60 labels.7 We observe that in all three tasks, age difference in end-task accuracy between cor-
BabbleLabbleachievesagivenF1scorewithfar rect and incorrect parses is less than 2.5%. Intu-
fewer user inputs than traditional supervision, by itively, the filters are effective because it is quite
as much as 100 times in the case of the Spouse difficult for an LF to be parsed from the explana-
task. Because explanations are applied to many tion, label its own example correctly (passing the
unlabeled examples, each individual input from semantic filter), and not label all examples in the
theusercanimplicitlycontributemany(noisy)la- training set with the same label or identically to
belstothelearningalgorithm. anotherLF(passingthepragmaticfilter).
We also observe, however, that once the num- We went one step further: using the LFs that
ber of labeled examples is sufficiently large, tra- wouldbeproducedbyaperfectsemanticparseras
ditional supervision once again dominates, since startingpoints,wesearchedfor“nearby”LFs(LFs
ground truth labels are preferable to noisy ones differing by only one predicate) with higher end-
generated by labeling functions. However, in do- task accuracy on the test set and succeeded 57%
mains where there is much more unlabeled data ofthetime(seeFigure5foranexample). Inother
available than labeled data (which in our experi- words, when users provide explanations, the sig-
enceismostdomains),wecangaininsupervision nalstheydescribeprovidegoodstartingpoints,but
efficiencyfromusingBabbleLabble. they are actually unlikely to be optimal. This ob-
Of those explanations that did not produce a servation is further supported by Table 5, which
correctLF,4%werecausedbytheexplanationre- shows that the filter bank is necessary to remove
ferring to unsupported concepts (e.g., one expla- clearly irrelevant LFs, but with that in place, the
nation referred to “the subject of the sentence,” simple rule-based semantic parser and a perfect
which our simple parser doesn’t support). An- parserhavenearlyidenticalaverageF1scores.
other 2% were caused by human errors (the cor-
4.3 UsingLFsasFunctionsorFeatures
rect LF for the explanation was inconsistent with
theexample). Theremainderwereduetounrecog- Once we have relevant logical forms from user-
nized paraphrases (e.g., the explanation said “the provided explanations, we have multiple options
order of appearance is X, Y” instead of a sup- for how to use them. Srivastava et al. (2017) pro-
portedphrasinglike“XcomesbeforeY”). poseusingtheselogicalformsasfeaturesinalin-
earclassifier,essentiallyusingatraditionalsuper-
4.2 UtilityofIncorrectParses
vision approach with user-specified features. We
In Table 4, we report LF summary statistics be- chooseinsteadtousethemasfunctionsforweakly
fore and after filtering. LF correctness is based supervisingthecreationofalargertrainingsetvia
on exact match with a manually generated parse data programming (Ratner et al., 2016). In Ta-
for each explanation. Surprisingly, the simple ble 6, we compare the two approaches directly,
heuristic-based filter bank successfully removes finding that the the data programming approach
over 95% of incorrect LFs in all three tasks, re- outperforms a feature-based one by 9.5 F1 points
sultinginfinalLFsetsthatare86%correctonav- on average with the rule-based parser, and by 4.5
pointswithaperfectparser.
7ZaidanandEisner(2008)alsofoundthatcollectingan-
Weattributethisdifferenceprimarilytotheabil-
notatorrationalesintheformofhighlightedsubstringsfrom
thesentenceonlydoubledannotationtime. ity ofdata programmingto utilize alarger featureExplanation Labeling Function Correctness Accuracy
F sa tl as re t, i nb ge c wa iu ts he “a i mw po rr od v e” def reL tF ur_ n1a( (x -) 1: if any(w.startswith(“improv”) for w in left(x.person2)) else 0) Correct 84.6%
a cp hp ee ma ir cs a lb .efore the def reL tF ur_ n1b( (x -) 1: if “improv” in left(x.person2)) else 0) Incorrect 84.6%
True, because “husband” def reL tF ur_ n2a( (x 1) i: f “husband” in left(x.person1, dist==1) else 0) Correct 13.6%
occurs right before the
person1. def reL tF u_ r2 nb( (x 1): if “husband” in left(x.person2, dist==1) else 0) Incorrect 66.2%
Figure 5: Incorrect LFs often still provide useful signal. On top is an incorrect LF produced for the
DiseasetaskthathadthesameaccuracyasthecorrectLF.OnbottomisacorrectLFfromtheSpouse
task and a more accurate incorrect LF discovered by randomly perturbing one predicate at a time as
describedinSection4.2. (Person2isalwaysthesecondpersoninthesentence).
0.45
0.40
0.35
0.30
0.25
0.20
0.15
0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000
Unlabeled Examples
erocS
1F
BL-DM BL BL+PP Feat Feat+PP
Spouse 46.5 50.1 49.8 33.9 39.2
Disease 39.7 42.3 43.2 40.8 43.8
Protein 40.6 47.3 47.4 36.7 44.0
Average 42.3 46.6 46.8 37.1 42.3
Spouse (BL) Table6: F1scoresobtainedusingexplanationsas
Spouse (Feat)
Disease (BL) functions for data programming (BL) or features
Disease (Feat)
(Feat), optionally with no discriminative model
Protein (BL)
Protein (Feat) (-DM)orusingaperfectparser(+PP).
Figure6: Whenlogicalformsofnaturallanguage 5 RelatedWorkandDiscussion
explanations are used as functions for data pro-
Our work has two themes: modeling natural lan-
gramming(astheyareinBabbleLabble),perfor-
guageexplanations/instructionsandlearningfrom
mancecanimprovewiththeadditionofunlabeled
weak supervision. The closest body of work is
data,whereasusingthemasfeaturesdoesnotben-
on “learning from natural language.” As men-
efitfromunlabeleddata.
tionedearlier,Srivastavaetal.(2017)convertnat-
ural language explanations into classifier features
(whereasweconvertthemintolabelingfunctions).
Goldwasser and Roth (2011) convert natural lan-
guage into concepts (e.g., the rules of a card
setandunlabeleddata. InFigure6,weshowhow game). Ling and Fidler (2017) use natural lan-
thedataprogrammingapproachimproveswiththe guageexplanationstoassistinsupervisinganim-
number of unlabeled examples, even as the num- age captioning model. Weston (2016); Li et al.
ber of LFs remains constant. We also observe (2016) learn from natural language feedback in a
qualitatively that data programming exposes the dialogue. Wang et al. (2017) convert natural lan-
classifier to additional patterns that are correlated guage definitions to rules in a semantic parser to
with our explanations but not mentioned directly. buildupprogressivelyhigher-levelconcepts.
Forexample,intheDiseasetask,twoofthefea- We lean on the formalism of semantic pars-
tures weighted most highly by the discriminative ing (Zelle and Mooney, 1996; Zettlemoyer and
model were the presence of the trigrams “could Collins, 2005; Liang, 2016). One notable trend is
produce a” or “support diagnosis of” between the to learn semantic parsers from weak supervision
chemicalanddisease,despitenoneofthesewords (Clarke et al., 2010; Liang et al., 2011), whereas
occurring in the explanations for that task. In Ta- ourgoalistoobtainweaksupervisionsignalfrom
ble 6 we see a 4.3 F1 point improvement (10%) semanticparsers.
when we use the discriminative model that can The broader topic of weak supervision has re-
takeadvantageofthesefeaturesratherthanapply- ceived much attention; we mention some works
ingtheLFsdirectlytothetestsetandmakingpre- most related to relation extraction. In distant su-
dictionsbasedonthelabelaggregator’soutputs. pervision (Craven et al., 1999; Mintz et al., 2009)and multi-instance learning (Riedel et al., 2010; lowship under Grant No. DGE-114747, the Stan-
Hoffmann et al., 2011), an existing knowledge ford Finch Family Fellowship, the Joseph W. and
base is used to (probabilistically) impute a train- HonMaiGoodmanStanfordGraduateFellowship,
ingset. Variousextensionshavefocusedonaggre- an NSF CAREER Award IIS-1552635, and the
gating a variety of supervision sources by learn- members of the Stanford DAWN project: Face-
ing generative models from noisy labels (Alfon- book, Google, Intel, Microsoft, NEC, Teradata,
secaetal.,2012;Takamatsuetal.,2012;Rothand andVMware.
Klakow, 2013; Ratner et al., 2016; Varma et al., We thank Alex Ratner for his assistance with
2017). data programming, Jason Fries and the many
Finally, while we have used natural language members of the Hazy Research group and Stan-
explanationsasinputtotrainmodels,theycanalso fordNLPgroupwhoprovidedfeedbackandtested
beoutputtointerpretmodels(Kreningetal.,2017; early prototyptes, Kaya Tilev from the Stanford
Leietal.,2016). Moregenerally, fromamachine Graduate School of Business for helpful discus-
learning perspective, labels are the primary asset, sions early on, and the OccamzRazor team: Tarik
but they are a low bandwidth signal between an- Koc, Benjamin Angulo, Katharina S. Volz, and
notators and the learning algorithm. Natural lan- CharlotteBrzozowski.
guageopensupamuchhigher-bandwidthcommu- The U.S. Government is authorized to repro-
nication channel. We have shown promising re- duce and distribute reprints for Governmental
sultsinrelationextraction(whereoneexplanation purposes notwithstanding any copyright notation
canbe“worth”100labels), anditwouldbeinter- thereon. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions
esting to extend our framework to other tasks and orrecommendationsexpressedinthismaterialare
moreinteractivesettings. those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views, policies, or endorsements, either ex-
Reproducibility
pressedorimplied,ofDARPA,DOE,NIH,ONR,
AFOSR,NSF,ortheU.S.Government.
The code, data, and experiments for this paper
are available on the CodaLab platform at https:
//worksheets.codalab.org/worksheets/ References
0x900e7e41deaa4ec5b2fe41dc50594548/.
L.V.Ahn,R.Liu,andM.Blum.2006. Peekaboom: a
gameforlocatingobjectsinimages. InConference
Refactored code with simplified dependencies, on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI).
performance and speed improvements, and inter- pages55–64.
activetutorialscanbefoundonGithub:
E. Alfonseca, K. Filippova, J. Delort, and G. Garrido.
https://github.com/HazyResearch/babble. 2012. Patternlearningforrelationextractionwitha
hierarchicaltopicmodel. InAssociationforCompu-
Acknowledgments tationalLinguistics(ACL).pages54–59.
S. Arora and E. Nyberg. 2009. Interactive annotation
We gratefully acknowledge the support of the
learningwithindirectfeaturevoting. InAssociation
following organizations: DARPA under No.
forComputationalLinguistics(ACL).pages55–60.
N66001-15-C-4043 (SIMPLEX), No. FA8750-
J. Clarke, D. Goldwasser, M. Chang, and D. Roth.
17-2-0095 (D3M), No. FA8750-12-2-0335
2010. Drivingsemanticparsingfromtheworld’sre-
(XDATA), and No. FA8750-13-2-0039 (DEFT),
sponse. InComputationalNaturalLanguageLearn-
DOE under No. 108845, NIH under No. ing(CoNLL).pages18–27.
U54EB020405 (Mobilize), ONR under No.
D. Corney, D. Albakour, M. Martinez-Alvarez, and
N000141712266 and No. N000141310129,
S. Moussa. 2016. What do a million news articles
AFOSR under No. 580K753, the Intel/NSF CPS looklike? InNewsIR@ECIR.pages42–47.
Security grant No. 1505728, the Michael J. Fox
M. Craven, J. Kumlien, et al. 1999. Constructing bi-
Foundation for Parkinsons Research under Grant
ologicalknowledgebasesbyextractinginformation
No. 14672, the Secure Internetof Things Project, fromtextsources. InISMB.pages77–86.
Qualcomm,Ericsson,AnalogDevices,theMoore
G.Druck,B.Settles,andA.McCallum.2009. Active
Foundation, the Okawa Research Grant, Ameri-
learningbylabelingfeatures. InEmpiricalMethods
canFamilyInsurance,Accenture,Toshiba,theNa-
in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP). pages
tionalScienceFoundationGraduateResearchFel- 81–90.D.GoldwasserandD.Roth.2011. Learningfromnat- B. Roth and D. Klakow. 2013. Combining generative
uralinstructions. InInternationalJointConference anddiscriminativemodelscoresfordistantsupervi-
onArtificialIntelligence(IJCAI).pages1794–1800. sion. In Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing(EMNLP).pages24–29.
R. Hoffmann, C. Zhang, X. Ling, L. S. Zettlemoyer,
and D. S. Weld. 2011. Knowledge-based weak su- S.Srivastava, I.Labutov, andT.Mitchell.2017. Joint
pervision for information extraction of overlapping concept learning and semantic parsing from natu-
relations. In Association for Computational Lin- ral language explanations. In Empirical Methods
guistics(ACL).pages541–550. in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP). pages
1528–1537.
S. Krening, B. Harrison, K. M. Feigh, C. L. Isbell,
M.Riedl,andA.Thomaz.2017. Learningfromex- S.Takamatsu,I.Sato,andH.Nakagawa.2012. Reduc-
planationsusingsentimentandadviceinRL. IEEE ing wrong labels in distant supervision for relation
Transactions on Cognitive and Developmental Sys- extraction. In Association for Computational Lin-
tems9(1):44–55. guistics(ACL).pages721–729.
T. Lei, R. Barzilay, and T. Jaakkola. 2016. Rational- P. Varma, B. He, D. Iter, P. Xu, R. Yu, C. D. Sa, and
izing neural predictions. In Empirical Methods in C.R’e.2017. Socraticlearning:Augmentinggener-
NaturalLanguageProcessing(EMNLP). ativemodelstoincorporatelatentsubsetsintraining
data. arXivpreprintarXiv:1610.08123.
J.Li,A.H.Miller,S.Chopra,M.Ranzato,andJ.We-
ston.2016. Learningthroughdialogueinteractions. S. I. Wang, S. Ginn, P. Liang, and C. D. Manning.
arXivpreprintarXiv:1612.04936. 2017. Naturalizingaprogramminglanguageviain-
teractivelearning. InAssociationforComputational
P. Liang. 2016. Learning executable semantic parsers
Linguistics(ACL).
for natural language understanding. Communica-
tionsoftheACM59.
C. Wei, Y. Peng, R. Leaman, A. P. Davis, C. J.
Mattingly, J. Li, T. C. Wiegers, and Z. Lu. 2015.
P. Liang, M. I. Jordan, and D. Klein. 2009. Learn-
Overview of the biocreative V chemical disease re-
ing from measurements in exponential families.
lation(cdr)task. InProceedingsofthefifthBioCre-
In International Conference on Machine Learning
ative challenge evaluation workshop. pages 154–
(ICML).
166.
P. Liang, M. I. Jordan, and D. Klein. 2011. Learn-
J. E. Weston. 2016. Dialog-based language learning.
ing dependency-based compositional semantics. In
InAdvancesinNeuralInformationProcessingSys-
Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL).
tems(NIPS).pages829–837.
pages590–599.
O.F.ZaidanandJ.Eisner.2008. Modelingannotators:
H. Ling and S. Fidler. 2017. Teaching machines to
Agenerativeapproachtolearningfromannotatorra-
describe images via natural language feedback. In
tionales. InEmpiricalMethodsinNaturalLanguage
AdvancesinNeuralInformationProcessingSystems
Processing(EMNLP).
(NIPS).
M. Zelle and R. J. Mooney. 1996. Learning to parse
M. Mintz, S. Bills, R. Snow, and D. Jurafsky. 2009.
database queries using inductive logic program-
Distant supervision for relation extraction without
ming. In Association for the Advancement of Arti-
labeleddata. InAssociationforComputationalLin-
ficialIntelligence(AAAI).pages1050–1055.
guistics(ACL).pages1003–1011.
H. Raghavan, O. Madani, and R. Jones. 2005. Inter- L. S. Zettlemoyer and M. Collins. 2005. Learning to
activefeatureselection. InInternationalJointCon- mapsentencestologicalform:Structuredclassifica-
ferenceonArtificialIntelligence(IJCAI).volume5, tionwithprobabilisticcategorialgrammars. InUn-
pages841–846. certaintyinArtificialIntelligence(UAI).pages658–
666.
A.J.Ratner,S.H.Bach,H.Ehrenberg,J.Fries,S.Wu,
andC.R’e.2018. Snorkel: Rapidtrainingdatacre-
ation with weak supervision. In Very Large Data
Bases(VLDB).
A.J.Ratner,C.M.D.Sa,S.Wu,D.Selsam,andC.R’e.
2016. Data programming: Creating large training
sets, quickly. In Advances in Neural Information
ProcessingSystems(NIPS).pages3567–3575.
S. Riedel, L. Yao, and A. McCallum. 2010. Model-
ingrelationsandtheirmentionswithoutlabeledtext.
In Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in
Databases(ECMLPKDD).pages148–163.A PredicateExamples
Below are the predicates in the rule-based semantic parser grammar, each of which may have many
supportedparaphrases,onlyoneofwhichislistedhereinaminimalexample.
Logic
and: X is true and Y is true
or: X is true or Y is true
not: X is not true
any: Any of X or Y or Z is true
all: All of X and Y and Z are true
none: None of X or Y or Z is true
Comparison
=: X is equal to Y
(cid:54)=: X is not Y
<: X is smaller than Y
≤: X is no more than Y
>: X is larger than Y
≥: X is at least Y
Syntax
lower: X is lowercase
upper: X is upper case
capital: X is capitalized
all caps: X is in all caps
starts with: X starts with "cardio"
ends with: X ends with "itis"
substring: X contains "-induced"
Named-entity Tags
person: A person is between X and Y
location: A place is within two words of X
date: A date is between X and Y
number: There are three numbers in the sentence
organization: An organization is right after X
Lists
list: (X, Y) is in Z
set: X, Y, and Z are true
count: There is one word between X and Y
contains: X is in Y
intersection: At least two of X are in Y
map: X is at the start of a word in Y
filter: There are three capitalized words to the left of X
alias: A spouse word is in the sentence (“spouse” is a predefined list from the user)
Position
word distance: X is two words before Y
char distance: X is twenty characters after Y
left: X is before Y
right: X is after Y
between: X is between Y and Z
within: X is within five words of YB SampleExplanations
Thefollowingareasampleoftheexplanationsprovidedbyusersforeachtask.
Spouse
Usersreferredtothefirstpersoninthesentenceas“X”andthesecondas“Y”.
Label true because "and" occurs between X and Y and "marriage" occurs
one word after person1.
Label true because person Y is preceded by ‘beau’.
Label false because the words "married", "spouse", "husband", and
"wife" do not occur in the sentence.
Label false because there are more than 2 people in the sentence and
"actor" or "actress" is left of person1 or person2.
Disease
Label true because the disease is immediately after the chemical and
’induc’ or ’assoc’ is in the chemical name.
Label true because a word containing ’develop’ appears somewhere
before the chemical, and the word ’following’ is between the disease
and the chemical.
Label true because "induced by", "caused by", or "due to" appears
between the chemical and the disease."
Label false because "none", "not", or "no" is within 30 characters to
the left of the disease.
Protein
Label true because "Ser" or "Tyr" are within 10 characters of the
protein.
Label true because the words "by" or "with" are between the protein
and kinase and the words "no", "not" or "none" are not in between
the protein and kinase and the total number of words between them is
smaller than 10.
Label false because the sentence contains "mRNA", "DNA", or "RNA".
Label false because there are two "," between the protein and the
kinase with less than 30 characters between them.